Carrie Alexandra Coon (born January 24, 1981) is an American actress. Known for her portrayals of complex women on stage and screen, she has received a Critics' Choice Television Award, as well as nominations for three Primetime Emmy Awards and a Tony Award.
On television, her breakout role was as widow Nora Durst in the drama series The Leftovers (2014–2017), for which she won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Actress in a Drama Series. She would later receive Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie for her role as a police chief in the third season of the black comedy crime anthology series Fargo (2017), Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for playing the matriarch of a wealthy family in the period drama series The Gilded Age (2022–present), and her third for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for her role as a divorced lawyer in the third season of the satirical dramedy anthology series The White Lotus (2025).
She made her film debut in Gone Girl (2014), with further roles in films such as The Post (2017), Widows (2018), The Nest (2020), Boston Strangler (2023), and His Three Daughters (2024). She has also portrayed characters in blockbuster films such as Proxima Midnight in Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and its sequel Avengers: Endgame (2019), and the daughter of Egon Spengler in Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021) and its sequel Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire (2024). On stage, Coon made her Broadway debut as a naive newlywed in the revival of Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (2012), for which she was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play.


== Early life and education ==
Carrie Alexandra Coon was born in Copley, Ohio, on January 24, 1981, to Paula (née Ploenes) and John Coon. She has an older sister, an older brother, and two younger brothers. She graduated from Copley High School in 1999, next attending the University of Mount Union, graduating in 2003 with a BA in English and Spanish. In 2006, she earned her MFA in acting from the University of Wisconsin–Madison.


== Career ==


=== 2006–2013: Early roles and theater work ===
Coon began her career in regional theater. After graduating from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Coon was immediately recruited by the Madison Repertory Theatre and made her professional stage debut in a production of Our Town. After her debut with the Madison Repertory Theatre, Coon joined the American Players Theatre and stayed with them for four seasons. Coon moved to Chicago in 2008 and made her Chicago debut with a production of Brontë at Remy Bumppo Theatre Company. Coon commuted between Chicago and Wisconsin for several years, alternating between Chicago productions, productions in Milwaukee, and seasons with the American Players Theatre. During these years, Coon provided for herself by performing motion capture work for a video game company based in Wisconsin.
Coon's breakthrough came in 2010 when she was cast as Honey in the Steppenwolf Theatre Company production of Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? The role immediately resulted in further parts in Chicago productions, and she followed the production to performances in Washington, D.C. and New York City, making her Broadway debut. For her performance, she won a Theatre World Award and received a nomination for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play. Steven Oxman of Variety described the Broadway revival as an "relentlessly intense" production adding that "Carrie Coon makes an especially sensitive, sympathetic Honey". Mark Kennedy of The Associated Press labelled the revival "astonishing" citing Coon as giving a performance of "great fragility". Coon made her screen debut in an episode of the short-lived NBC series The Playboy Club in 2011. She later guest-starred on TV series Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, Ironside, and Intelligence.


=== 2014–2019: Acclaim in prestige television ===
Following her Tony Award nomination in 2014, Coon was cast as one of the main characters in the HBO drama series The Leftovers, alongside Justin Theroux, Amy Brenneman, and Ann Dowd. That same year, she made her film debut in Gone Girl, based on the 2012 novel of same name and directed by David Fincher.
In early 2015, Coon starred in the lead role of the Off-Broadway production of Placebo at Playwrights Horizons. She also participated in readings for her husband Tracy Letts' 2015–2016 season play Mary Page Marlowe and was in talks to perform in the production in Chicago if her filming schedule with The Leftovers permitted; in December 2015, it was announced that Coon would be one of six actresses portraying the title character in Mary Page Marlowe for the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in Chicago from March to May 2016. In April 2015, Coon left The Gersh Agency for United Talent Agency. In October and November 2015, Coon filmed the movie Strange Weather alongside actress Holly Hunter for director Katherine Dieckmann in Mississippi. In December 2015, she filmed the horror romance The Keeping Hours for director Karen Moncrieff and Blumhouse Productions.
Coon starred in the lead role of Gloria Burgle in the third season of the FX anthology series Fargo. She received a nomination for the Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie for her role and won the TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Drama for both Fargo and The Leftovers. In 2017, she filmed Great Choice, a horror short mimicking a 1990s Red Lobster commercial. The same year she played real life journalist Meg Greenfield in the Steven Spielberg–directed historical drama film The Post. In 2018, Coon co-starred in the Steve McQueen heist thriller film Widows. Coon provided the voice and motion capture for Proxima Midnight, a member of the Black Order and a child of Thanos, in the superhero film Avengers: Infinity War (2018) directed by the Russo brothers.


=== 2020–present: Career expansion ===
Coon received a Canadian Screen Award nomination for Best Actress at the 9th Canadian Screen Awards in 2021 for her work in the film The Nest. On April 30, 2020, Coon joined the cast of the HBO drama series The Gilded Age as Bertha Russell, which began airing in 2022. She starred in the Azazel Jacobs family drama His Three Daughters (2023). The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival. The film follows three estranged daughters as they care for their dying father. Jon Frosch of The Hollywood Reporter wrote "Coon is masterful at conveying the space between those inner and outer selves." The film was picked up for distribution by Netflix and released in September 2024. In January 2024, Coon joined the cast of the third season of the HBO anthology series The White Lotus, which premiered in February 2025.  In August 2025, it was announced that Coon would return to Broadway in Tracy Letts' play Bug at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater with performances starting in December 2025, reprising the role she played at the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in 2020 and 2021.


== Personal life ==
Coon married actor and playwright Tracy Letts in 2013. They have a son born in 2018 and a daughter born in 2021.


== Acting credits ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Theatre ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Carrie Coon at IMDb 
Carrie Coon at the Internet Broadway Database 
Carrie Coon at the Internet Off-Broadway Database (archived) 
Carrie Coon at Playbill Vault