Daniel Francis Boyle (born 20 October 1956) is an English director and producer, active in film, television, and theatre. He has been described by the British Film Institute as "one of the liveliest and most unpredictable of British directors, adept at shifting genres and bringing a personal quality to whatever he tackles." 
His debut film Shallow Grave (1994) won the BAFTA Award for Best British Film. The British Film Institute ranked Trainspotting (1996) the 10th greatest British film of the 20th century. Boyle's 2008 crime drama film Slumdog Millionaire (2008), the most successful British film of the decade, was nominated for ten Academy Awards and won eight, including the Academy Award for Best Director. He won the Golden Globe and BAFTA Award for Best Director. Boyle received two more Academy Award nominations for writing and producing the survival drama 127 Hours (2010).
His other notable works include the films The Beach (2000), 28 Days Later (2002), its sequel 28 Years Later (2025), Sunshine (2007), Steve Jobs (2015), T2 Trainspotting (2017), and Yesterday (2019). Boyle was also the artistic director for the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony.


== Early life and education ==
Daniel Francis Boyle was born on 20 October 1956, in Radcliffe, Lancashire, England, about 6 miles (9.7 km) north of Manchester's city centre, His father Francis "Frank" was from Manchester and was of Irish Catholic descent from County Mayo, and his mother Annie Boyle, was from County Galway. He has a twin sister, Marie, and a younger sister, Bernadette, both of whom are teachers.
Boyle was brought up in a working-class Catholic family. He was an altar boy for eight years and his mother had the priesthood in mind for him, but at the age of 14 he was persuaded by a priest not to transfer to a seminary.

Whether he was saving me from the priesthood or the priesthood from me, I don't know. But quite soon after, I started doing drama. And there's a real connection, I think. All these directors – Martin Scorsese, John Woo, M. Night Shyamalan – they were all meant to be priests. There's something very theatrical about it. It's basically the same job – poncing around, telling people what to think. He now describes himself as a "spiritual atheist".
Boyle attended Thornleigh Salesian College, a Catholic boys' direct grant grammar school in Bolton, and studied English and drama at the University College of North Wales (now Bangor University), where he directed several productions for the student drama society.


== Career ==


=== Theatre and television ===

Upon graduating from university he began his career at the Joint Stock Theatre Company before moving on to the Royal Court Theatre in 1982 where he directed The Genius by Howard Brenton and Saved by Edward Bond. He directed five productions for the Royal Shakespeare Company.
In 1987 Boyle started working in television as a producer for BBC Northern Ireland where he produced, amongst other TV films, Alan Clarke's controversial Elephant before becoming a director on shows such as Arise And Go Now, Not Even God Is Wise Enough, For The Greater Good, Scout, and two episodes of Inspector Morse.
Boyle was responsible for the BBC Two series Mr. Wroe's Virgins in 1993. In between The Beach and 28 Days Later Boyle directed two TV films for the BBC in 2001–Vacuuming Completely Nude in Paradise and Strumpet.
In 2011, he directed Frankenstein for the National Theatre. This production was broadcast to cinemas as a part of National Theatre Live on 17 March 2011. He has appeared on Top Gear and set the fastest wet lap at that time. In 2014 both Boyle and Christian Colson signed to a first look deal with FX Productions.
In September 2022, it was announced that Boyle would direct a dance adaptation of The Matrix, titled "Free Your Mind", which debuted in October 2023 in Manchester.


==== The Children's Monologues ====

On 14 November 2010, he directed a one-night play at the Old Vic Theatre in London titled The Children's Monologues, in aid of his charity Dramatic Need, which operates in Rwanda and South Africa, helping young people to come to terms with trauma and conflict. He co-directed another performance of the play in 2015 at the Royal Court Theatre, and again in 2017 at Carnegie Hall in New York City.


==== Isles of Wonder ====

Boyle was artistic director for the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in London. Entitled Isles of Wonder, it charted aspects of British culture including the Industrial Revolution and contributions to literature, music, film, and technology.
Reception to the ceremony was generally positive both nationally in the United Kingdom and internationally.


==== Pistol ====
On 11 January 2021, it was announced that Boyle would be adapting the Steve Jones' autobiography Lonely Boy into a six-part TV series entitled Pistol that charts the rise and fall of the Sex Pistols. The series aired on FX and Disney+ on 30 May 2022. The show was filmed in London.


=== Film ===
Boyle's love for film began with his first viewing of Apocalypse Now:

It had eviscerated my brain, completely. I was an impressionable twenty-one-year-old guy from the sticks. My brain had not been fed and watered with great culture, you know, as art is meant to do. It had been sandblasted by the power of cinema. And that's why cinema, despite everything we try to do, it remains a young man's medium, really, in terms of audience.


==== 1990s: Shallow Grave and Trainspotting ====
The first film Boyle directed was Shallow Grave. The film was the most commercially successful British film of 1995, won the BAFTA Award for Best British Film, and led to the production of Trainspotting. Working with writer John Hodge and producer Andrew Macdonald, Shallow Grave earned Boyle the Best Newcomer Award from the 1996 London Film Critics Circle. Critics credited these films with revitalising British cinema in the early '90s. The BFI ranked Trainspotting the 10th greatest British film of the 20th century.
Boyle declined an offer to direct Alien Resurrection, the fourth film of the Alien franchise to make A Life Less Ordinary.


==== 2000s: The Beach, 28 Days Later and Slumdog Millionaire ====
Boyle's next project was a film adaptation of the cult novel The Beach by Alex Garland. It was filmed in Thailand. Casting Leonardo DiCaprio led to a feud with Ewan McGregor. He collaborated with Garland on the post-apocalyptic horror film 28 Days Later.

He directed a short film Alien Love Triangle, which was intended to be one of three shorts within a feature film. The project was cancelled after the two other shorts were made into feature films: Mimic and Impostor. In 2004 Boyle directed Millions, scripted by Frank Cottrell Boyce. His next collaboration with Alex Garland was the 2007 science-fiction film Sunshine.
In 2008 he directed Slumdog Millionaire, the story of an impoverished child on the streets of Mumbai, India, who competes on the local version of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, for which Boyle won Academy and BAFTA Awards for Best Director. The most successful British film of the decade, the film won eight Academy Awards and seven BAFTA Awards. Boyle commented, "To be a film-maker...you have to lead. You have to be psychotic in your desire to do something. People always like the easy route. You have to push very hard to get something unusual, something different." Andrew Macdonald, producer of Trainspotting, said "Boyle takes a subject that you've often seen portrayed realistically, in a politically correct way, whether it's junkies or slum orphans, and he has managed to make it realistic but also incredibly uplifting and joyful." The success led a deal with Fox Searchlight.
Despite the commercial success of Slumdog Millionaire, Boyle faced criticism for his portrayal of India through a Western, idealized lens. Some critics saw the film as "poverty porn," though Boyle argued he showed India's "lust for life" and "resilience."


==== 2010s: 127 Hours, Steve Jobs and T2 Trainspotting ====
In 2010, Boyle directed the film 127 Hours. It was based on Aron Ralston's autobiography Between a Rock and a Hard Place, which detailed his struggle of being trapped under a boulder while canyoneering alone. The film was released on 5 November 2010 to critical acclaim and got six nominations at the 83rd Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Adapted Screenplay for Boyle and Best Actor for Franco.

Boyle's next film was Trance. It has been reported another instalment of the 28 Days Later franchise is in the development stages. Boyle has stated previously that in theory the third instalment of the series would be titled 28 Months Later, but alluded to a film taking place somewhere else in the world he created in 28 Days Later and 28 Weeks Later. He was also stated to be producing the upcoming film Paani.
Boyle told an interviewer about the eclectic range of his films, "There's a theme running through all of them—and I just realised this. They're all about someone facing impossible odds and overcoming them." With a strong interest in music, Boyle has mentioned in interviews that he has considered a musical film with original compositions. Boyle has also expressed interest in an animated film.
Boyle's biographical film Steve Jobs about Apple Inc. founder Steve Jobs closed the 59th BFI London Film Festival. It was the third time Boyle has had that honour, after Slumdog Millionaire in 2008 and 127 Hours two years later. The BFI's London Film Festival Director, Clare Stewart, said Boyle had created an "exhilarating and audacious film about a complex, charismatic pioneer". He directed the sequel to Trainspotting, T2 Trainspotting.
In a BBC interview, Boyle stated that he did not write his own films but they did reflect his personality. "I am not a big auteur fan and like to work with writers, but ultimately a film is a director's vision, because he gets all its elements together towards that vision."
In March 2018, Boyle confirmed he would be directing the then-untitled twenty-fifth James Bond film (later known as No Time to Die) but dropped out that August due to a dispute over the film's script. He and writer Richard Curtis collaborated on Yesterday, released on 28 June 2019.


==== 2020s: 28 Years Later and upcoming projects ====
In 2024, after a two-year hiatus from directing, Boyle reunited with Garland to make 28 Years Later, which is set in a post-apocalyptic Britain 28 years after the first film in the 28 Days Later series. The film was released in the UK in June 2025. It is the first in a planned trilogy, with the second, 28 Years Later: The Bone Temple, already under way.
In August 2025, Deadline Hollywood reported that Boyle would direct a film adaptation of Ink, a play by James Graham about the rise of media mogul Rupert Murdoch. Guy Pearce and Jack O'Connell are in talks to portray Murdoch and newspaper editor Larry Lamb respectively, with Graham adapting the screenplay and filming set to begin in October 2025.


== Personal life ==
While at university, Boyle dated actress Frances Barber.
As of 2010 he was living in Mile End, London. He has three children.
In 2013, he came out as a republican who believed the British monarchy would be abolished in his lifetime.


== Other activities ==
Boyle was a founding trustee in 2007, of Dramatic Need, a charity which operated in Rwanda and South Africa, helping young people to come to terms with trauma and conflict. The charity was wound up in November 2021.
As of 2008, Boyle was the patron of North West England-based young people's substance misuse charity, Early Break, which was founded and based in his home town of Radcliffe. In 2014, Boyle was appointed a patron of HOME in Manchester.
In February 2017, Boyle announced a bid to launch a £30 million film and media school in Manchester. Manchester School of Digital Arts was subsequently launched in June 2022 as part of Manchester Metropolitan University.
In May 2025, Boyle signed a petition started after the killing of Palestinian photojournalist Fatima Hassouna, accusing Israel of committing genocide in the Gaza Strip.


== Recognition ==
In 2010, The Tablet named Boyle one of Britain's most influential Roman Catholics.
The BBC referred to Boyle as a "titan of the British film industry – renowned for his spunky grit – typified by his 1996 film Trainspotting."
In 2012, Boyle was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Peter Blake to appear in a new version of The Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover, to celebrate the British cultural figures of his lifetime.
In December 2012, it was reported that Boyle turned down a knighthood in the New Year Honours list. He later said that he believed "in being an equal citizen rather than a preferred subject" and that "that sort of thing just makes me vomit." 


=== Awards and nominations ===


== Theatre ==
Assistant stage manager

Assistant director

Director


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===

Short film

Alien Love Triangle (2008)
Executive producer

Twin Town (1997)
28 Weeks Later (2007)
Creation Stories (2021)


=== Television ===

TV films


== References ==


== External links ==

Danny Boyle at IMDb
Danny Boyle biography and credits at the BFI's Screenonline