Ethan Green Hawke (born November 6, 1970) is an American actor, author and film director. He is known for his versatility across a wide range of roles, starring in both blockbusters and independent films. In a career on both stage and screen spanning more than four decades, Hawke has received numerous accolades, including a Daytime Emmy Award, as well as nominations for four Academy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, a British Academy Film Award and a Tony Award.
Hawke made his film debut at age fourteen in Explorers (1985) and gained wider recognition for his role as a student in Dead Poets Society (1989). During the 1990s, he established himself as a leading man with Ben Stiller's Reality Bites (1994), Andrew Niccol's Gattaca (1997), and Alfonso Cuarón's Great Expectations (1998). He earned a nomination for Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for portraying a rookie police officer in the crime thriller Training Day (2001). Hawke collaborated with Richard Linklater in the acclaimed Before trilogy (1995–2013). The latter two films garnered him two Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay nominations. Hawke starred in Linklater's coming-of-age drama Boyhood (2014), earning nominations for the Academy Award and BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actor. 
Hawke achieved commercial success in films Sinister (2012), The Purge (2013), The Magnificent Seven (2016), and The Black Phone (2021), and saw critical acclaim for his roles in Maudie (2016) and First Reformed (2017). Hawke has directed the narrative films Chelsea Walls (2001), The Hottest State (2006), and Blaze (2018), as well as the documentary Seymour: An Introduction (2014) and the documentary series The Last Movie Stars (2022). He portrayed abolitionist John Brown in the miniseries The Good Lord Bird (2020), for which he received a Golden Globe nomination, and appeared as Arthur Harrow in the Marvel miniseries Moon Knight (2022).
Hawke has appeared in many theater productions. He made his Broadway debut in 1992 in Anton Chekhov's The Seagull and was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play in 2007 for his performance in Tom Stoppard's The Coast of Utopia. In 2010, he was nominated for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Director of a Play for directing Sam Shepard's A Lie of the Mind. Divorced from actress Uma Thurman, he has been married to Ryan Shawhughes since 2008; he has two children from each marriage, including actors Maya Hawke and Levon Hawke.


== Early life and education ==
Ethan Green Hawke was born in Austin, Texas, on November 6, 1970. His father, James Hawke, was an insurance actuary, while his mother, Leslie (née Green), was a charity worker and teacher. Hawke's parents were high school sweethearts from Fort Worth, Texas and married when his mother was seventeen. Hawke was born a year later, while both of his parents were attending the University of Texas at Austin. His parents separated and later divorced in 1974, when he was four years old.
After his parents' separation, Hawke was raised by his mother. They moved several times before settling in Brooklyn, New York City, where he attended the Packer Collegiate Institute in Brooklyn Heights. When Hawke was ten or twelve, his mother remarried and the family relocated to West Windsor Township, New Jersey. There, he attended West Windsor Plainsboro High School before transferring to the Hun School of Princeton, a boarding school from which he graduated in 1988. Around this time, Hawke volunteered with his mother's organization, the Alex Fund, a charity that supported educational opportunities for underprivileged children in Romania.
In high school, Hawke aspired to become a writer but developed a strong interest in acting. He made his stage debut at age thirteen in a McCarter Theatre production of George Bernard Shaw's Saint Joan. He later performed in his high school's productions of Meet Me in St. Louis and You Can't Take It with You. During his time at the Hun School, he also studied acting at the McCarter Theatre, located on the Princeton University campus. After graduating, Hawke studied acting at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh but left after being cast in Dead Poets Society (1989). He later enrolled in New York University's English program for two years before leaving to pursue acting full-time.


== Career ==


=== 1985–1993: Early years and breakthrough ===
With his mother's permission, Hawke attended his first casting call at age fourteen and was cast in Joe Dante's Explorers (1985), playing a misfit schoolboy alongside River Phoenix. Although the film received positive reviews, it performed poorly at the box office, leading Hawke to step away from acting for a time after its release. He later described the experience as difficult to handle at such a young age, remarking, "I would never recommend that a kid act". In 1989, Hawke had his breakthrough role as a shy student in Peter Weir's Dead Poets Society. The film was critically and commercially successful and won the BAFTA Award for Best Film. Reflecting on the impact of its success, Hawke later said, "I didn't want to be an actor and I went back to college. But then the film's success was so monumental that I was getting offers to be in such interesting movies and be in such interesting places and it seemed silly to pursue anything else.'" After filming Dead Poets Society, he auditioned for his next project, the comedy-drama Dad (1989). 
In 1991, Hawke co-founded Malaparte, a Manhattan-based theater company that operated until 2000. His first leading role came with Randal Kleiser's film White Fang (1991), an adaptation of Jack London's novel of the same name, in which he portrayed a young Klondike gold prospector who befriends a wolfdog. A writer for The Oregonian appreciated how he kept the film from "being ridiculous or overly sentimental", while Roger Ebert praised how he was "properly callow at the beginning and properly matured at the end"; Hawke himself later called it the "single best experience of my acting life". In A Midnight Clear (1992), his character leads a group of American soldiers during World War II, tasked with capturing a small squad of German troops stationed in the Ardennes forest in France. Hawke made his Broadway debut in 1992, portraying the playwright Konstantin Treplev in Anton Chekhov's The Seagull at the Lyceum Theater in Manhattan. He then played Nando Parrado, one of the survivors of the Uruguayan Air Force Flight 571 crash in the Andes, in the survival drama Alive (1993), adapted from Piers Paul Read's 1974 non-fiction book.


=== 1994–2000: Established leading man ===

Hawke's next role was in the Generation X drama Reality Bites (1994), in which he portrayed a disaffected slacker who mocks the ambitions of his love interest, played by Winona Ryder. Ebert liked his "convincing and noteworthy" performance, writing that "Hawke captures all the right notes as the boorish Troy". Caryn James observed that his "subtle and strong performance makes it clear that Troy feels things too deeply to risk failure and admit he's feeling anything at all". The film did moderately well at the box office, grossing $41 million on a budget of $11 million. Hawke starred in Richard Linklater's Before Sunrise (1995), the first installment of the Before film trilogy. He portrayed a young American man who meets a young French woman—portrayed by Julie Delpy—and they both disembark in Vienna. The reception for the film and Hawke's performance was positive, with the former receiving a 100 percent rating on Rotten Tomatoes.
Hawke directed the music video for Lisa Loeb's US Billboard Hot 100 number-one single "Stay (I Missed You)"; Loeb was then a member of Hawke's theater company. Spin magazine named the video its Video of the Year in 1994. Hawke appeared in a 1995 production of Sam Shepard's Buried Child, directed by Gary Sinise at the Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago. He published his first novel, titled The Hottest State, in 1996, which tells the story of a love affair between a young actor and a singer. He described writing the book as both the "scariest  [... but also] one of the best things I ever did." Entertainment Weekly said that Hawke "opens himself to rough literary scrutiny in The Hottest State. If Hawke is serious [...] he'd do well to work awhile in less exposed venues." The New York Times thought Hawke did "a fine job of showing what it's like to be young and full of confusion", concluding that The Hottest State was ultimately "a sweet love story".

Hawke called his script in Andrew Niccol's science fiction film Gattaca (1997) "one of the more interesting" ones he had read in "a number of years". In it, he played the role of a man who infiltrates a society of genetically perfect humans by assuming another man's identity. Ebert called him a good choice for the lead role, stating that he "combin[es] the restless dreams of a 'Godchild' with the plausible exterior of a lab baby". Alongside Gwyneth Paltrow and Robert De Niro, he starred in Great Expectations (1998), a contemporary film adaptation of Charles Dickens's 1861 novel of the same name, directed by Alfonso Cuarón. Hawke criticized the film's time of release, stating that "nobody gave a shit about anything but Titanic for about nine months after [...] particularly another romance". He collaborated with Linklater once again on The Newton Boys (1998), based on the true story of the Newton Gang. The film saw generally negative reception; Rotten Tomatoes' consensus said that the "sharp" cast made up for "the frustrations of a story puzzlingly short on dramatic tension".
In 1999, he starred as Kilroy in the Tennessee Williams play Camino Real at the Williamstown Theater Festival in Massachusetts. That year, Hawke starred in Snow Falling on Cedars, adapted from David Guterson's novel of the same name. Set in the 1950s, he played a young reporter who covers the murder trial of a fisherman. The film received a tepid response, with Entertainment Weekly commenting that "Hawke scrunches himself into such a dark knot that we have no idea who [his character] Ishmael is or why he acts as he does". Hawke's next film role was in Michael Almereyda's Hamlet (2000), in which he played the titular character. The adaptation set William Shakespeare's play in contemporary New York City, a choice Hawke said made the story feel more "accessible and vital".


=== 2001–2006: Training Day and further Linklater films ===
In 2001, Hawke appeared in two more Linklater films: Waking Life and Tape, both critically acclaimed. In the animated Waking Life, he shared a single scene with former co-star Delpy continuing conversations begun in Before Sunrise. The real-time drama Tape, based on a play by Stephen Belber, took place entirely in a single motel room with three characters played by Hawke, Robert Sean Leonard and Uma Thurman. Hawke then portrayed rookie cop Jake Hoyt alongside Denzel Washington, as part of a pair of narcotics detectives from the Los Angeles Police Department spending a day in the gang-infested neighborhoods of South Los Angeles, in Training Day (2001). The film saw favorable critical reception; Paul Clinton of CNN described Hawke's performance as "totally believable as a doe-eyed rookie going toe-to-toe with a legend [Washington]". Hawke later called Training Day his "best experience in Hollywood". His performance earned him nominations for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
Hawke explored several projects outside of acting in the early 2000s. He made his directorial debut with Chelsea Walls (2002), an independent drama about five struggling artists living in New York City's Hotel Chelsea. That same year, he published his second novel, Ash Wednesday (2002), which appeared on The New York Times Best Seller list. Centered on an AWOL soldier and his pregnant girlfriend, the novel earned praise from critics. The Guardian described it as "sharply and poignantly written [...] an intense one-sitting read", while James noted that Hawke showed "a novelist's innate gifts [...] a sharp eye, a fluid storytelling voice and the imagination to create complicated individuals", though it found him "weaker at narrative tricks that can be taught". Returning to Broadway, he played Henry Percy (Hotspur) in Jack O'Brien's 2003 production of Henry IV. Ben Brantley, writing in The New York Times, opined that Hawke's interpretation of Hotspur might be "too contemporary for some tastes", but allowed "great fun to watch as he fumes and fulminates".
Hawke returned to film in 2004 with two releases:  the psychological thriller Taking Lives and the romantic drama Before Sunset. Upon release, Taking Lives received broadly negative reviews, though Hawke's performance as a serial killer who takes on the identities of his victims was favored by a critic from the Star Tribune, who said that he played the "complex character persuasively". He then reunited with Linklater for Before Sunset (2004), the second installment of the Before trilogy. Co-written by Hawke, Linklater and Delpy, the film follows a young man and woman who reunite in Paris nine years after meeting in Vienna. A Hartford Courant writer remarked that the screenwriting collaboration between the three "[kept] Jesse and Celine iridescent and fresh, one of the most delightful and moving of all romantic movie couples". Hawke called it one of his favorite films, a "romance for realists". Before Sunset was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.
Hawke starred in the 2005 action thriller Assault on Precinct 13, a loose remake of John Carpenter's 1976 film of the same name with an updated storyline. He played a police sergeant who must band together with criminals to defend a police precinct from a siege by corrupt cops. While numerous critics found it inferior to the original, they enjoyed Hawke's performance, with Jami Bernard from New York Daily News stating that Hawke and co-star Laurence Fishburne made the film work, "supported by a mostly strong cast". In 2006, he directed his second feature film, The Hottest State, based on his 1996 novel of the same name. It saw poor reception from critics, largely for being too self-conscious and overly pretentious. From November 2006 to May 2007, Hawke starred as Mikhail Bakunin in Tom Stoppard's trilogy play The Coast of Utopia, an eight-hour-long production at the Lincoln Center Theater in New York. The performance earned Hawke a Tony Award nomination for the Best Featured Actor in a Play.


=== 2007–2012: Continued acclaim ===

Hawke starred alongside Philip Seymour Hoffman, Marisa Tomei and Albert Finney in the crime drama Before the Devil Knows You're Dead (2007), the final direction of Sidney Lumet. Hawke prepared for his role by working closely with Lumet during a two-week rehearsal period, which allowed the cast to make creative decisions before filming began. On-set, Lumet intentionally pitted Hawke and Hoffman against each other to heighten the tension. In Before the Devil Knows You're Dead, Hawke played the younger brother of a debt-ridden broker who entices him into a plan to rob their parents' bank, but the scheme goes awry. USA Today's Claudia Puig deemed the film "highly entertaining", describing Hawke and Hoffman's performances as excellent, while Peter Travers, writing for Rolling Stone, stated that Hawke "[dug] deep to create a haunting portrayal of loss".
In November 2007, Hawke directed Things We Want, a two-act play by Jonathan Marc Sherman, for the artist-driven off-Broadway company The New Group. New York praised Hawke's "understated direction", particularly his ability to "steer a gifted cast away from the histrionics". In Brian Goodman's crime drama What Doesn't Kill You (2008), Hawke played the childhood friend of Mark Ruffalo's character, who both become involved in crime in their South Boston neighborhood and scheme a heist to escape poverty. Peter Brunette—in The Hollywood Reporter—named Hawke's performance a "personal best", and the New York Times critic Manohla Dargis wrote that he "holds [the viewer] with a physically expressive performance that telegraphs each byroad of his character's inner world". Hawke appeared in two features in 2009: New York, I Love You, a romance film comprising twelve short films; and Staten Island, a crime drama in which he co-starred alongside Vincent D'Onofrio and Seymour Cassel.
To prepare for his role as a vampire hematologist in the science fiction horror film Daybreakers (2009), Hawke studied "the greats" of past cinematic vampire performances, including Willem Dafoe's portrayal in the Shadow of the Vampire (2000). He traveled to Australia to film Daybreakers, which was directed by the Spierig brothers. The film fared well both critically and commercially, grossing $51 million on a $20 million budget. Hawke's next role was in Antoine Fuqua's Brooklyn's Finest, in which he portrayed a corrupt narcotics officer. Although the film—released in the US in 2010—opened to mediocre reception, his performance garnered praise from critics, including a New York Daily News reviewer who remarked, "Hawke—continuing an evolution toward stronger, more intense acting than anyone might've predicted from him 20 years ago—drives the movie."
In January 2010, Hawke directed his second play, Sam Shepard's A Lie of the Mind, on the New York stage.  It marked the first major off-Broadway revival of the play since its 1985 debut. Hawke was attracted to the play's exploration of "the nature of reality" and its "weird juxtaposition of humor and mysticism". In his review for The New York Times, Brantley lauded the production's "scary, splendid clarity" and praised Hawke for eliciting a performance that "connoisseurs of precision acting will be savoring for years to come". Entertainment Weekly commented that although A Lie of the Mind "wobbles a bit in its late stages", Hawke's "hearty" revival managed to "resurrect the spellbinding uneasiness of the original". The production garnered five Lucille Lortel Award nominations, including one for Outstanding Revival, and earned Hawke a Drama Desk Award nomination for Outstanding Director of a Play.
In the 2011 television adaptation of Herman Melville's Moby-Dick, Hawke played the role of Starbuck, the first officer to William Hurt's Captain Ahab. He then starred opposite Kristin Scott Thomas in Paweł Pawlikowski's The Woman in the Fifth, a "lush puzzler" about an American novelist struggling to rebuild his life in Paris. In 2012, Hawke appeared in the horror genre for the first time, playing a true crime writer in Scott Derrickson's Sinister. Before the US release of Sinister, Hawke said that he had previously been hesitant about horror films because they often do not require strong acting performances. However, he mentioned that the producer of Sinister, Jason Blum, with whom Hawke had a background in theater, approached him with an offer involving a script that featured both a "great character and a real filmmaker".


=== 2013–2018: Career expansion ===

Hawke reunited with director Linklater and co-star Delpy for the third installment of the Before trilogy, titled Before Midnight (2013). The film follows a couple, he and Delpy's character, who spend a summer vacation in Greece with their children. Before Midnight received critical acclaim, with one from Variety naming the scene in the hotel room "one for the actors' handbook". The film earned Hawke, Linklater and Delpy another Academy Award nomination for Best Adapted Screenplay. Hawke next starred in the horror-thriller The Purge (2013), set in a future America where all crime is legal for one night each year. Despite mixed reviews, the film opened atop the box office on its opening weekend with a $34 million debut. In early 2013, Hawke starred in and directed the play Clive, written by Jonathan Marc Sherman and inspired by Bertolt Brecht's Baal.
Hawke prepared for his role as a former racecar driver in Getaway (2013) by attending a one-day driving school at the Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course, where he learned high-performance driving techniques such as 180-degree spins and e-brake maneuvers. The film was critically panned. He played the title role in a Broadway production of Macbeth at the Lincoln Center Theater in late 2013. The Hollywood Reporter critic David Rooney criticized the "disharmonious acting styles led by Hawke's underpowered take on [his] role". Released in mid-2014, Linklater's Boyhood follows the life of an American boy from age six to eighteen, with Hawke portraying his father. The film became the best-reviewed release of 2014 and was named best film of the year by numerous critics' associations. Hawke later admitted that the film's widespread acclaim came as a surprise, recalling that when he first joined the project, it felt less like a "proper movie" and more like "a radical '60s film experiment or something".
He earned several nominations for his performance, including the Academy Award, BAFTA, Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor.
Hawke reunited with the Spierig brothers for the science fiction thriller Predestination (2014), in which he played a time-traveling agent on his final assignment. Writing for Vulture, David Edelstein wrote how he enjoyed Hawke's "low-key, solemn, enigmatic" performance. He next reunited with his Gattaca director Andrew Niccol for Good Kill (2014), a contemporary war drama. In his "best screen role in years" according to Rooney, Hawke portrayed a drone pilot grappling with a troubled conscience. He made his documentary debut with Seymour: An Introduction, which premiered at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival. The film was conceived after a dinner party attended by both Hawke and its subject, classical pianist Seymour Bernstein. Seymour: An Introduction is a profile of Bernstein, who later said that, although he was normally a private person, he was unable to decline Hawke's request to make the film because the actor was "so endearing".

Hawke had two films premiere at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival, both of which were well-received. In Robert Budreau's drama Born to Be Blue (2015), he portrayed jazz musician Chet Baker, focusing on the artist's turbulent late-1960s comeback and struggle with heroin addiction. He also starred in Rebecca Miller's romantic comedy Maggie's Plan as an anthropologist and aspiring novelist, alongside Greta Gerwig and Julianne Moore. That same year, he appeared in the coming-of-age drama Ten Thousand Saints and the psychological thriller Regression opposite Emma Watson. In November 2015, Hawke published his third book, Rules for a Knight, written as a letter from a father to his four children reflecting on moral values and personal integrity. In Ti West's western In a Valley of Violence, he played a drifter who seeks revenge in a small frontier town ruled by a ruthless marshal—a performance that critics praised.
In 2016, Hawke took on two unpleasant roles in succession, first playing the abusive father of a promising young baseball player in The Phenom, and then the stern husband of Maud Lewis—portrayed by Sally Hawkins—in Maudie. While some critics commended his surprising range, others argued that Hawke was "miscast" as a harsh figure. He reunited with Training Day director Antoine Fuqua and actor Denzel Washington for The Magnificent Seven (2016), a remake of the 1960 western film of the same name. In the film, Hawke played a former Confederate sharpshooter struggling with PTSD from the American Civil War. In the US, the film grossed $34.7 million in its opening weekend, topping the box office. Also in 2016, Hawke narrated the interactive short film Invasion!, which earned him and his co-creators a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Interactive – Original Daytime Content, and released his fourth book, Indeh: A Story of the Apache Wars, which chronicles the conflicts between the Apache and the US.
Hawke starred in Paul Schrader's drama First Reformed (2017) as a former military chaplain tormented by the death of his son, whom he had encouraged to join the armed forces, while grappling with the looming threat of climate change. Critics, including Slate's K. Austin Collins, praised his performance, calling it "extraordinarily well-tuned" and stating that "every ounce of likability, vulnerability, angry cynicism and ineptitude [in his career] seems to be summed up here". Hawke had two films premiere at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival. In Juliet, Naked, a romantic comedy adapted from Nick Hornby's 2009 novel of the same name, he played an obscure rock musician whose eponymous album drives the plot. Blaze, his third direction, is a biographical film about the little-known country musician Blaze Foley and was selected for the festival's main competition.


=== 2019–present: Renewed box-office success ===

Hawke starred in Vincent D'Onofrio's 2019 western drama The Kid. In the film, he portrayed the sheriff hunting the outlaw Billy the Kid. The Hollywood Reporter appreciated how his "gracious performance" gave his younger co-star Dane DeHaan "room to stretch out", while Bilge Ebiri stated in a Vulture article that his "melancholy stoicism" [...] might work on paper, but fails to convey much of an inner life". Hawke and producer Jason Blum adapted the novel The Good Lord Bird into a miniseries of the same name, which premiered on Showtime in October 2020. His role as abolitionist John Brown in the miniseries earned him a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film.
In 2019, Hawke returned to Broadway in the revival of Sam Shepard's True West, co-starring Paul Dano. The production began previews in December 27, 2018, opened in January 2019 and closed two months later.
 It was named a Critic's Pick by The New York Times. In 2020, Hawke portrayed Nikola Tesla, the titular inventor and engineer, in the biographical drama film Tesla. For the role, Hawke drew inspiration from both Tesla's own writings and singer and actor David Bowie, taking cues from Bowie's portrayal of Tesla in The Prestige (2006). A Slate writer said that his performance was "brilliant but psychologically tortured", suffering from a combination of both "germaphobia and obsessive-compulsive disorder". Hawke published his third novel and fifth book, titled A Bright Ray of Darkness, in February 2021. 
In 2022, Hawke starred as the primary antagonist Arthur Harrow in the Disney+ streaming series Moon Knight, produced by Marvel Studios. Devan Coggan, writing for Entertainment Weekly, called him "unsettlingly charismatic" in the role, while a critic for the Roger Ebert website called "his range, mix of intensity and subtlety in drama and his comedic skills [...] impressive". In The Black Phone (2021), Hawke played the role of a serial killer of children. An Empire writer praised him for a "frightening and fascinating physical performance", while Wendy Ide, writing in The Guardian, said that his performance contributed to the film's "rewarding depth of dramatic detail". The Black Phone was a significant commercial success, grossing $161.4 million. He then traveled to Ireland to film Robert Eggers' The Northman, a 10th-century Viking epic in which he appeared alongside Nicole Kidman, Anya Taylor-Joy and Willem Dafoe.
In 2022, Hawke's six-part biographical documentary on Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward, The Last Movie Stars, was broadcast on HBO Max. In Linklater's biopic Blue Moon (2025), he led as songwriter Lorenz Hart reflecting on himself on the opening night of the musical Oklahoma!. A critic for the Houston Chronicle praised his performance as one of the year's best, while NBC News described it as a career highlight. Later that year, he reprised his role as the serial killer of children in Black Phone 2, the sequel to The Black Phone. Collider said that Hawke played "at his best as the Grabber", while The New York Times said that his performance "create[d] a more cohesive picture than the original".


== Artistry and screen technique ==

Known for his versatility in a wide range of roles, Hawke was named by Esquire as the greatest actor of his generation in 2022. He is also known for starring in both independent films and Hollywood blockbusters. He describes acting as a "shamanistic process", where "you give over to it, much like singing a song", and compares portraying characters to music, stating that "you have to get inside your character's song". Hawke is known for preferring the artistic aspects of being an actor rather than seeking commercial success or fame as a film star. He is a critic of the industry's increasing emphasis on social-media metrics over talent, calling some casting decisions "crazy". 
Hawke explained that the eclecticism and diversity in his roles stems from his early life; for his mother, he would portray figures like an "artistic, literary, conscientious political thinker". According to The New Yorker theater critic John Lahr, the skills that acting demands—"empathy, imagination, charm, [and] surrender"—are features he developed through his experiences with his mother. Hawke often tries to tell stories when writing, directing, acting and producing, a practice Lahr said set him apart from his contemporaries. He has described method acting as "crazy", though he acknowledges that it works for some performers. Hawke instead prefers what he calls "third-person acting", a technique that allows him "to truly become the characters he's playing".
Hawke has cited both Robert De Niro and Denzel Washington as major influences, particularly from a collaboration with the former on Great Expectations (1998), during which he admired De Niro's work ethic: "He's not waiting for someone to give him permission to do the kind of work he wants [...] he's just coming in and doing that kind of work". He observed the same during the filming of Training Day (2001) with Washington, who Hawke later referred to as the "greatest actor of our generation". He described Austin Pendleton as the "only acting teacher [he's] ever had". Hawke has credited several directors as key influences, including Peter Weir, who showed him "what filmmaking could be", and Paul Schrader and Martin Scorsese, whom he credits with shaping his "adult relationship with film" and motivating him to continue acting. Hawke has received widespread critical acclaim for his creative partnership with director Richard Linklater, with whom he has collaborated on nine films.


== Personal life and other ventures ==
On May 1, 1998, Hawke married actress Uma Thurman, whom he met on the set of Gattaca in 1996. They have two children, Maya (born 1998) and Levon (born 2002), both of whom became actors. The couple separated in 2003 amidst allegations of infidelity and filed for divorce the following year, which was finalized in August 2005. In June 2008, Hawke married Ryan Shawhughes, who had briefly worked as a nanny for his and Thurman's children before graduating from Columbia University. Addressing speculation about their relationship, Hawke stated that his first marriage had ended "due to many pressures, none of which were remotely connected to Ryan". The couple has two daughters. 
Hawke identifies as a feminist and has criticized the film industry for being "such a boys' club". He has served as co-chair of the New York Public Library's Young Lions Committee, one of the institution's major philanthropic boards. In 2001, he co-founded the Young Lions Fiction Award, an annual prize recognizing outstanding fiction by writers under 35. He was named a Library Lion by the New York Public Library in November 2010 and joined the library's board of trustees in May 2016. In November 2016, Hawke and Ryan ran the New York City Marathon to support the Doe Fund, a non-profit that works to break the cycles of homelessness, addiction and criminal recidivism. An Episcopalian, he has said that faith played a larger role in his youth but that he failed to develop it further in adulthood. 
Hawke is a staunch supporter of the Democratic Party. For president of the United States, he supported Bill Bradley in 2000; Barack Obama in 2008; Hillary Clinton in 2016; and Kamala Harris in 2024. Hawke has voiced criticism for Donald Trump, the 45th and 47th president of the United States, criticizing him for his Make America Great Again slogan and for threatening to put Hillary Clinton in jail. He is a supporter of gay rights; in March 2011, he and his wife released a video supporting same-sex marriage in New York.


== Publications ==
Hawke, Ethan (1996). The Hottest State: A Novel (1st ed.). Boston: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-54083-4. OCLC 34474927.
Hawke, Ethan (2002). Ash Wednesday: A Novel (1st ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-41326-1. OCLC 48967928 – via Internet Archive.
Hawke, Ethan (April 2009). "The Last Outlaw Poet". Rolling Stone. No. 1076. pp. 50–61, 78–79. ISSN 0035-791X. Archived from the original on April 10, 2009.
Hawke, Ethan (2015). Rules for a Knight (1st ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0307962331 – via Google Books.
Hawke, Ethan (2016). Indeh: A Story of the Apache Wars (1st ed.). New York: Grand Central Publishing. ISBN 978-1-401-31099-8 – via Google Books.
Hawke, Ethan (2021). A Bright Ray of Darkness: A Novel (1st ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-785-15260-3. OCLC 34474927.


== References ==


== External links ==

Ethan Hawke at IMDb
Ethan Hawke at the Internet Broadway Database 
Ethan Hawke at the Internet Off-Broadway Database (archived)
Ethan Hawke at Rotten Tomatoes