Guy Edward Pearce (born 5 October 1967) is an Australian actor. His accolades include a Primetime Emmy Award, and nominations for an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, and two Golden Globe Awards.
Born in Cambridgeshire, England, and raised in Geelong, Australia, Pearce received international attention for his break-out roles in The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert (1994), L.A. Confidential (1997), Ravenous (1999), and Memento (2000). His subsequent roles were in The Time Machine (2002), The Count of Monte Cristo (2002), Bedtime Stories (2008), The Road (2009), The Hurt Locker (2009), The King's Speech (2010), Lawless (2012), and Mary Queen of Scots (2018). 
He portrayed Peter Weyland in Prometheus (2012) and Alien: Covenant (2017), and acted in the Marvel Cinematic Universe playing Aldrich Killian in the film Iron Man 3 (2013). In Australian cinema he has acted in The Proposition (2005), Animal Kingdom (2010), The Rover (2014), and Swinging Safari (2018). For his performance as a wealthy industrialist in The Brutalist (2024), he received a nomination for the Academy Award and the BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actor.
On television, he has played the title role in the series of films Jack Irish (2012–2021). Pearce starred in the HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce (2011) and Mare of Easttown (2021). The former won him a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor.


== Early life ==
Pearce was born on 5 October 1967 in Ely, Cambridgeshire, England. His father, Stuart Pearce, was a Royal New Zealand Air Force pilot and RAF test pilot, and his mother, Anne Cocking (née Pickering), was an English schoolteacher. He has an elder sister, Tracy. When Pearce was three years old, the family relocated to Geelong, Victoria, Australia. When he was eight years old, Pearce's father died in an aircraft accident.
Pearce attended Geelong College, and was a member of the Geelong Society of Operatic and Dramatic Arts (GSODA) Junior Players. At the age of 16, he was a competitive amateur bodybuilder, leading to the title of Junior Mr. Victoria. He lived in Box Hill North, Victoria in the late 1980s while working on the Australian drama series Neighbours. His first film appearance, while still at Geelong College, was in a Victorian Vice-Chancellors-funded film Life and Study at University, produced and directed by Peter Lane of Deakin University.


== Career ==


=== Film and television ===
Pearce transitioned to television when he was cast in the Australian soap opera Neighbours in 1986, playing the role of Mike Young for three years. He reprised the role in 2022 for the show's then final episode, and returned to make multiple guest appearances in the revival from 2023 to 2024. Pearce also found roles in other television series such as Home and Away (1988) and Snowy River: The McGregor Saga (1993).

The director/producer/writer Frank Howson cast Pearce in his first three films, Heaven Tonight, Hunting, and Flynn, and paid for him to go to the Cannes Film Festival in 1991 for the premiere of the Howson-directed Hunting. The accompanying Howson-funded publicity campaign brought Pearce to the attention of the international film industry. He made his first major film breakthrough shortly after, with his role as a drag queen in The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert in 1994. Since then, he has appeared in several US productions including L.A. Confidential, Ravenous, Rules of Engagement, Memento, The Count of Monte Cristo, and The Time Machine.
Pearce portrayed pop artist Andy Warhol in Factory Girl and Harry Houdini in Death Defying Acts. He also appeared in The Road and in Bedtime Stories with Adam Sandler. Pearce continued to perform in Australian films, such as The Hard Word (2002) and The Proposition (2005), written by fellow Australian Nick Cave.
In January 2009, Pearce returned to the stage after a seven-year absence. He performed in the Melbourne Theatre Company's production of Poor Boy, a play with music, co-written by Matt Cameron and Tim Finn. In 2009, he portrayed Staff Sergeant Matthew Thompson in The Hurt Locker. In 2010, he appeared as David, Prince of Wales, who became Edward VIII, in The King's Speech. Both films won the Academy Award for Best Picture, making Pearce the first actor to appear in back-to-back Best Picture winners since Michael Peña (who appeared in Million Dollar Baby and Crash).
Pearce starred as the eponymous lead in the Australian TV miniseries Jack Irish, an adaptation of the detective novels of author Peter Temple broadcast on the ABC network in 2012. In May 2012, Pearce was cast to star in David Michôd's The Rover. In 2013, Pearce played the villain character Aldrich Killian in Iron Man 3. Pearce appeared in a documentary special celebrating Neighbours' 30th anniversary, Neighbours 30th: The Stars Reunite, which aired in Australia and the UK in 2015. Pearce had a supporting role in Neil Armfield's 2015 romantic-drama film Holding the Man. For his role in the 2024 film The Brutalist, he received an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination.
Pearce is a signatory of the Film Workers for Palestine boycott pledge that was published in September 2025.. 
Hollywood actor Guy Pearce has apologized for a series of social media posts claiming that the top three pornography companies are owned by Jews, that Israel was behind the 9/11 terror attacks as well as the murder of conservative activist Charlie Kirk. Pearce, who was nominated for an Oscar earlier this year for his performance in ‘The Brutalist,’ also shared material from Holocaust denying White supremacist Nick Fuentes. “It has been brought to my attention that, in my support of Palestine, I have inadvertently re-posted articles and/or statements, that have contained misinformation and falsehoods,” Pearce says in a statement to the UK Jewish News. “I am aware how sharing inaccurate content can cause confusion and distress; for this, I am deeply sorry. I will certainly endeavor to be more diligent in the future to verify anything I share online.” In a subsequent post, Pearce wrote, “I meant every word of that apology but I recognize that meaningful action must accompany any apology. To prevent any further hurt, confusion or damage to others, I will be stepping back from social media for the time being.”


=== Music ===
In 1989, Pearce released the single "Call of the Wild" from the soundtrack Heaven Tonight. The song peaked at number 156 on the ARIA Charts. He appeared in Australian band Silverchair's music video for "Across the Night" and in Razorlight's video for "Before I Fall to Pieces." Pearce recorded the soundtrack for A Slipping-Down Life, singing and playing guitar on cover versions of songs by Ron Sexsmith, Vic Chesnutt and Robyn Hitchcock. Pearce released his first album, Broken Bones, in November 2014.  Pearce released his second studio album, The Nomad, in 2018.


== Personal life ==
Pearce married his childhood sweetheart, psychologist Kate Mestitz, in March 1997. In October 2015, Pearce announced their divorce. Pearce was in a relationship with Dutch actress Carice van Houten; they had a son in August 2016. In January 2025, Van Houten stated that she and Pearce had split, and have "... not been a couple for years".
Pearce has supported charitable organisations related to animal conservation and habitat preservation, as well as publicly expressing his solidarity with Palestine amid the Gaza war.
In February 2025, Pearce accused his L.A. Confidential co-star Kevin Spacey of sexually harassing him while filming the movie. Spacey responded to the accusation by posting a video on the social media platform X, where he told Pearce to "grow up" and that he was "not a victim."


== Acting credits ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Theatre ===


=== Music videos ===


== Discography ==
Broken Bones (2014)
The Nomad (2018)


== Awards and nominations ==

On 18 September 2011, Pearce won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or Movie for his work in Todd Haynes' limited series Mildred Pierce as Monty Beragon. Pearce received a Golden Globe Award nomination for his performance. Pearce has been nominated for three Screen Actors Guild Awards winning for Outstanding Cast in a Motion Picture along with the cast of The King's Speech (2010). Pearce was nominated with the cast of L.A. Confidential (1997) and Mildred Pierce (2011).


== See also ==
List of Australian Academy Award winners and nominees
List of actors with Academy Award nominations


== References ==


== External links ==

Guy Pearce at IMDb
Actor Profile at Local World's Ely News