Haley Joel Osment (born April 10, 1988) is an American actor. Beginning his career as a child actor, Osment's role in the comedy-drama film Forrest Gump (1994) won him a Young Artist Award. His breakthrough came with the psychological thriller film The Sixth Sense (1999), for which he won a Saturn Award and was nominated for an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award, and a Screen Actors Guild Award. Osment achieved further success with the drama film Pay It Forward (2000), the science fiction film A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001), which won him a second Saturn Award, the comedy film Secondhand Lions (2003), which won him a Critics Choice Award, and the animated film The Jungle Book 2 (2003). 
Osment is known as the voice of Sora and Vanitas in the Kingdom Hearts series. He made his Broadway debut in a short-lived revival of David Mamet's play American Buffalo (2008). Osment starred in independent film Montana Amazon (2012), also serving as executive producer. His further on-screen work includes the body horror film Tusk (2014), the comedy films Sex Ed (2014), Entourage (2015), Izzy Gets the F*ck Across Town (2017), and Clara's Ghost (2018), and the drama films Almost Friends (2016), Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile (2019), and Somebody I Used to Know (2023). In animation, Osment has voiced Kash D. Langford on the Netflix series Jurassic World Camp Cretaceous (2021), Leonard "Buzzsaw" Burne on the DreamWorks Animation Television series DreamWorks Dragons: The Nine Realms (2021–2023), Casey Jones in the animated film Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: The Movie (2022), and Collector in the animated film LEGO Marvel Avengers: Code Red (2023).


== Early life ==
Haley Joel Osment was born on April 10, 1988, in Los Angeles, California. He is the son of Theresa (née Seifert), a teacher, and Michael Eugene Osment, a theater and film actor, both natives of Birmingham, Alabama. Osment was raised Roman Catholic. He has a younger sister, Emily, who is also an actress. Osment's parents have described his childhood as a "good old-fashioned Southern upbringing". His father said that when Osment was learning to speak, he deliberately avoided using baby talk when communicating with his son. As a child, Osment wrestled and played basketball, football, and golf.
Osment was a student at Flintridge Preparatory School in La Cañada Flintridge, California. He graduated from New York University's Tisch School of the Arts in 2011.


== Career ==


=== Child actor ===
While visiting a store at age four, Osment signed up with a talent scout. After being called back for an audition, he was asked to describe the biggest thing he had ever seen; Osment's description of an IMAX theater screen helped win him a part in a Pizza Hut TV commercial. The commercial launched Osment's career, and later that year he starred in the ABC TV sitcom Thunder Alley, his first role in a television series. Osment's first feature film role was as Forrest Gump's son in the 1994 film Forrest Gump, also having a minor role in another 1994 film, Mixed Nuts. Throughout the rest of the 1990s, Osment played regular or recurring roles in various television series, including The Jeff Foxworthy Show and the final season of Murphy Brown, where he replaced Dyllan Christopher as Murphy's son, Avery.

Osment also made several guest appearances on shows, including The Larry Sanders Show, Walker, Texas Ranger, Touched by an Angel, Chicago Hope, The Pretender, and Ally McBeal. He appeared in the 1996 film Bogus, alongside Whoopi Goldberg and Gérard Depardieu, and the 1998 television film The Lake, as well as I'll Remember April (1999) with future The Sixth Sense co-star Trevor Morgan.
Osment first achieved stardom in 1999, when he appeared in The Sixth Sense, co-starring Bruce Willis. For his portrayal of Cole Sear, a psychic child, Osment won the Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor. He was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, becoming the second-youngest performer ever to receive an Academy nomination for a supporting role, but lost the final Oscar vote to Michael Caine, with whom Osment later worked, appearing together in Secondhand Lions. Sear's line "I see dead people," became a popular catchphrase and is often parodied in media, being #44 on the American Film Institute's list of 100 Movie Quotes. Osment made minor appearances on the animated series Family Guy in 2000 and 2001.
In 2000, Osment had a leading role as Trevor McKinney in Pay It Forward; the following year, he appeared in Steven Spielberg's A.I. Artificial Intelligence, cementing his stature as one of the leading young actors in Hollywood. This role earned him his second Saturn Award for Best Younger Actor, and further critical acclaim. In reviewing the film, critic Roger Ebert stated that "Osment, who is onscreen in almost every scene, is one of the best actors now working". In 2001, Osment starred in the Polish film Edges of the Lord as Romek. Between 2002 and 2003, Osment had voice roles in the Walt Disney Pictures films The Country Bears, The Hunchback of Notre Dame II, and The Jungle Book 2, with Jake Thomas auditioning for the role of Mowgli prior to Osment's casting. He returned to live action with the 2003 film Secondhand Lions.
In 2002, Osment starred in Kingdom Hearts, the first installment of the video game series Kingdom Hearts, providing the voice of protagonist Sora and later Vanitas. In 2003, Osment voiced Takeshi Jin in the English version of the Immortal Grand Prix anime television series.


=== Teenaged and adult roles ===
Osment appeared in Home of the Giants (2007), playing a high school journalist opposite Ryan Merriman and Danielle Panabaker. 
Osment made his Broadway debut at the Belasco Theatre in 2008, playing the role of Bobby in a revival of David Mamet's American Buffalo. Osment co-starred with John Leguizamo and Cedric the Entertainer and was described as "all grown up". The show opened to mixed reviews, and a provisional statement was made on November 20, 2008, that it would close after the first week.
Osment subsequently worked on Montana Amazon as both an actor and executive producer. The film starred Olympia Dukakis and debuted at the Orlando and Big Apple Film Festivals in November 2010, winning Best Feature Film at the latter. He appeared in Sassy Pants (2012) in an adult role.
In 2013, Osment appeared in Amazon's Alpha House and co-starred in the Will Ferrell and Adam McKay-produced comedy melodrama miniseries The Spoils of Babylon and The Spoils Before Dying for IFC. Osment also had roles in the first two films of Kevin Smith's True North trilogy, as well as Teddy Craft in Tusk and as a fictionalized version of Canadian journalist Adrien Arcand in Yoga Hosers.
In 2015, Osment appeared in Entourage, the film adaptation of the television series. The following year, he appeared in the drama film Almost Friends.
In 2017, Osment held a recurring role in season 4 of HBO's Silicon Valley as VR expert and tech financier Keenan Feldspar. That same year, Osment made an appearance on BBC America's Top Gear America as one of the guests in the fourth episode of season 1. He then appeared in the comedy films Izzy Gets the F*ck Across Town (2017) and Clara's Ghost (2018).
In 2019, Osment had a supporting role in the Netflix film Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile, starring alongside Lily Collins as Liz, who follows the prosecution of Ted Bundy, played by Zac Efron. In 2023, Osment was in the Amazon Prime film Somebody I Used to Know. He also had roles in two series that have Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg as executive producers: Osment plays Mesmer in the Amazon series The Boys and Dr. Stu Camillo in the Hulu series Future Man.
Osment's voice roles include Kash D. Langford on the Netflix series Jurassic World Camp Cretaceous (2021), Leonard "Buzzsaw" Burne on the DreamWorks Animation Television series DreamWorks Dragons: The Nine Realms (2021–2023), Casey Jones in the animated film Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: The Movie (2022), and Collector in the animated film LEGO Marvel Avengers: Code Red (2023).


== Personal life ==
Osment plays the guitar and piano. He is an avid golfer who began playing at the age of seven, playing for the U.S. team in the All-Star Cup 2005 under team leader Mark O'Meara, and has participated in the annual Michael Douglas & Friends Celebrity Golf Tournament.
In 2006, Osment suffered a broken rib and fractured shoulder blade in an auto accident. He pleaded no contest to driving under the influence of alcohol and misdemeanor drug possession and was sentenced to three years' probation, 60 hours in an alcohol rehabilitation and education program, a fine of $1,500, and attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous.
In 2007, Osment began attending New York University. He graduated four years later.
In 2025, Osment's Altadena home was destroyed during the Eaton Fire, part of the January 2025 Southern California wildfires.
In April 2025, Osment was arrested at a ski resort in Mammoth Lakes, California, for public intoxication and possession of a controlled substance, later confirmed to be cocaine. While under arrest, he was captured on police body cameras using slurs against Jewish people towards his arresting officer, for which he later apologized. Osment was released after booking. In June 2025, he appeared in court for these acts and was sentenced to attend three Alcoholics Anonymous meetings a week for six months, as well as have twice-weekly sessions with his therapist during the same period.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


=== Theater ===


== Awards ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Haley Joel Osment at IMDb