Jamie Jilynn Chung (born April 10, 1983) is an American actress and former reality television personality. She began her career in 2004 as a cast member on the MTV reality series The Real World: San Diego and subsequently through her appearances on its spin-off series, Real World/Road Rules Challenge: The Inferno II. She is regarded by many as the Real World alumna with the most successful media career.
She later transitioned into acting and has since become known for films such as Dragonball Evolution, Grown Ups, Premium Rush, Sorority Row, The Hangover Part II, Sucker Punch, and Big Hero 6 (2014). Chung received critical acclaim for her lead performance in the independent drama film Eden. Chung played the lead role in the miniseries Samurai Girl, was a series regular in the superhero drama series The Gifted (2017–19), played the recurring role of Mulan in the ABC fantasy television series Once Upon a Time, and has been a series regular as the voice of Go Go Tomago for the animated Big Hero 6: The Series (2017–21), reprising her role from the 2014 film. Beginning in August 2020, Chung appeared in the recurring role of Ji-Ah on the HBO series Lovecraft Country.


== Early life ==
Jamie Jilynn Chung was born April 10, 1983, in San Francisco, California, where she grew up. She and her older sister are second-generation Korean Americans. They were raised by "traditional" parents who moved to the United States in 1980 and ran a hamburger restaurant. She attended Commodore Sloat Elementary School and Aptos Middle School before attending Lowell High School in the fall of 1997. After graduating from Lowell High School in 2001, Chung attended and in 2005 graduated from the University of California, Riverside with a B.A. in economics. She was a member of Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority.


== Career ==


=== Reality television ===
Chung was a cast member on The Real World: San Diego, the 14th season of MTV's long-running reality TV show The Real World, which aired in 2004. At the time, MTV described her as a hard-working student who worked two jobs to pay her tuition but also enjoyed partying. She was also described by her friends as not having the best taste in men.
After appearing on The Real World, Chung appeared on its spin-off game show, Real World/Road Rules Challenge, as a cast member in that show's 2005 season, The Inferno II, during which she was a member of the "Good Guys" team, which squared off against the "Bad Asses". By the end of the season, after several cast members had been eliminated during the competition, Chung remained, along with her teammates Darrell Taylor, Landon Lueck, and Mike Mizanin. Chung and her teammates defeated the remaining members of the Bad Asses in the final event, and won the competition.


=== Acting ===

After her stint on The Real World, Chung began her acting career with various minor roles in television and films, including as Cordy Han in ten episodes of Days of Our Lives, as a Hooters girl in the 2007 comedy I Now Pronounce You Chuck & Larry, and in episodes of CSI: NY and Veronica Mars.

One of Chung's earliest on-camera appearances was in the music video for Rihanna's single "Umbrella", as first woman to the right of Jay Z. The video premiered April 26, 2007. In 2008, Chung had her first major onscreen role, as the series lead in the ABC Family television miniseries Samurai Girl. In SFGate, her acting in this role was described as making "a promising bid for TV stardom." It also claimed that the show was an attempt to add more diversity to TV shows.
She had supporting roles in the 2009 feature films Sorority Row and Dragonball Evolution, in the latter as Goku's love interest, Chi-Chi, as well as the lead role in one of the segments of the film Burning Palms. Chung later starred in the Disney Channel TV film Princess Protection Program, which co-starred Demi Lovato and Selena Gomez. She appeared in 2010 film Grown Ups and had a supporting role in the 2012 martial arts film The Man with the Iron Fists.
In March 2011, Chung played Amber in Zack Snyder's action fantasy film Sucker Punch, which required her to undergo physical training with Navy SEALs and work with stunt and fight choreographers who had worked on Snyder's previous films. Chung stated that she was nervous about having to sing in the film: "I don't sing. I'm working on it, but just because I'm Korean doesn't mean I karaoke." She then provided the voice of Aimi Yoshida in the video game X-Men: Destiny, which was released that September.
Chung gained her first major feature film role in the 2012 film Premium Rush, directed by David Koepp. That same year, she starred as the lead in the independent film Eden, in which she played a Korean American girl abducted and coerced into prostitution by American human traffickers. Since 2012, she has appeared in the recurring role of Mulan in the television series Once Upon a Time.
In 2014, Chung co-starred in Sin City: A Dame to Kill For, which was released that August. That October saw the release of the animated Disney film Big Hero 6, in which she provided the voice of GoGo Tomago. Big Hero 6 won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. She reprised the role in Disney XD's 2017 series Big Hero 6: The Series and in Kingdom Hearts III (2019).
Chung and her then-fiancé, Bryan Greenberg, co-starred in the film Already Tomorrow in Hong Kong, which was released in February 2015.
In March 2016, Chung was cast as attorney Lana Harris in the one-hour legal drama Miranda's Rights, but the series was not picked up by NBC after the pilot episode.
Chung was cast as Blink in the Fox superhero series The Gifted, which debuted in October 2017. She plays a younger version of the character played by Fan Bingbing in the 2014 feature film X-Men: Days of Future Past.
In August 2020, Chung appeared in the HBO series Lovecraft Country. She plays the recurring character Ji-Ah, a young nurse living in Daegu during the Korean War who falls in love with American soldier Atticus Freeman (Jonathan Majors). The series' sixth episode centers on Ji-Ah and garnered critical acclaim. Chung stated that this was her most challenging role to date. She added that her experience on the series inspired her to pitch her own show, which sold.
In 2023, Chung voiced Vax, a freedom fighter and recurring character in My Dad the Bounty Hunter.
Chung joined the cast of the Hulu comedy series Unprisoned in its second season, which spanned eight episodes, premiering on July 17, 2024.


=== Other work ===
Chung writes for her own fashion blog, What the Chung?


== Awards and recognition ==
On April 2, 2009, Chung won the Female Stars of Tomorrow Award at the 2009 ShoWest industry trade show along with her Sorority Row castmates.
At the 2012 Seattle International Film Festival, Chung won the Golden Space Needle Award for Best Actress for Eden.


== Personal life ==
Chung began dating actor and musician Bryan Greenberg in 2012. They became engaged in December 2013, and were married on October 31, 2015, in Santa Barbara, California. In 2019, Chung revealed that she had started the process of oocyte cryopreservation. In October 2021, she and Greenberg had twin sons who were born via surrogacy.
In 2013, they acquired a home in Manhattan, and in 2020, acquired a home in Brooklyn.
In 2023, through her appearance on Finding Your Roots, Chung learned that she is a direct descendant of Jeong Geum-gang. Born in the 1300s, he served in a high ranking government position equivalent to deputy prime minister during the Goryeo Dynasty. She also uncovered that according to legend in 1457 a distant ancestral cousin of hers played a crucial role in the aftermath of Danjong of Joseon’s overthrow. This cousin recovered the body of the deposed king, who had been executed by his uncle Sejo from a river in Yeongwol and provided him with a respectful burial. To escape retribution, he went into hiding for the remainder of his life. Honored by Koreans as a “loyal subject to the rightful king,” his courageous act continues to be commemorated annually in the village, where locals reenact the king’s funeral. The town also features a statue depicting Chung’s cousin holding Danjong’s body.
In January 2025, Chung and Greenberg's house in Los Angeles was destroyed by the Southern California wildfires. They and their twin sons were unharmed.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===
 Reading Rainbow (2025 revival)
| Herself/Reader
|Episode: "No Cats in the Library!"


=== Video games ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Jamie Chung at IMDb