Jodi Benson (née Marzorati; born October 10, 1961) is an American actress and singer. She is best known for providing the voice of Ariel in Disney's The Little Mermaid (1989), as well as in its sequel, prequel, and television series spin-off, along with many other Disney works. Benson is also known for her portrayal of Barbie in the second and third films of the Toy Story franchise (1999, 2010), and in the Toy Story Toons short Hawaiian Vacation (2011).
Benson was born and raised in a Catholic family. She graduated from Boylan Central Catholic High School in Rockford, Illinois, and Millikin University in Decatur, Illinois. For her contributions to Disney, Benson was named a "Disney Legend" in 2011.
Benson's other notable voice roles in Disney projects include Weebo in Flubber (1997), Belle (taking over for Paige O'Hara) in House of Mouse (2001–03), Lady (who was originally voiced by Barbara Luddy) in Lady and the Tramp II: Scamp's Adventure (2001) and Anita Radcliffe (originally voiced by Lisa Davis) in 101 Dalmatians II: Patch's London Adventure (2003); she also appeared as Sam in the live-action Disney film Enchanted (2007). Outside of Disney, Benson's film credits include Don Bluth's Thumbelina (1994), Balto II: Wolf Quest (2002), and Balto III: Wings of Change (2004); on television, she voiced the character of Tula in Hanna-Barbera's The Pirates of Dark Water (1991–93), and Jane Doe and Patsy Smiles in Cartoon Network's Camp Lazlo (2005–08). In video games, Benson provided the voice of EVA in the Metal Gear series (2004–10).


== Career ==

Benson made her debut in the 1983 Kenny Ortega-directed Marilyn: An American Fable. She was introduced to Alan Menken around 1985, during an audition for Kick, which never was produced. Other Broadway credits include a starring role in the 1986 Broadway musical Smile, where she introduced a song called "Disneyland". In 1987, Howard Ashman, the lyricist of Smile, would go on to write the lyrics for The Little Mermaid. She describes the song "Disneyland" at the "Smile" Reunion concert held on September 22, 2014, "This is the first piece of the puzzle of my life, the first step of the journey, so to speak". Benson also sings "Disneyland" on a compilation CD called Unsung Musicals. In 1989, Benson appeared in the Broadway musical, Welcome to the Club, alongside Samuel E. Wright, who performed the voice for Sebastian the Crab in The Little Mermaid.
In 1992, Benson received a Tony Award nomination for Best Actress in a Musical for her role as Polly Baker in Crazy For You. She played the narrator in Joseph And The Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat in 1998.
In 2004, Benson voiced the character of EVA in the video game Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater. Due to her association with children-oriented projects, she was advised by voice director Kris Zimmerman to adopt a pseudonym for the game; her credited name, "Suzetta Miñet", was coined by Zimmerman based on the name of Benson's pet dog during her childhood, Suzette Monet. For two decades after the game's release, Miñet's true identity was the subject of scrutiny and speculation among fans until Benson officially revealed her involvement during the promotion of the game's remake, Metal Gear Solid Delta: Snake Eater, in November 2024.
In 2004–06, Benson contributed as the host and narrator of the children's Christian home video series called "Baby Faith", created by Integrity Publishers & FamilyTreeMedia.
In 2007, Benson played the secretary Sam in Disney's live-action/animated film, Enchanted. Benson also played the Queen in a one-night concert version of Rodgers & Hammerstein's Cinderella at the Nashville Symphony Orchestra in May 2010.
Benson was at the 2012 SYTA conference singing her signature song "Part of Your World" on August 27, 2012.
Benson joined the "2013 Spring Pops" on May 14–15, 2013 as a guest soloist with the Boston Pops. She has been a frequent celebrity narrator at Disney's Candlelight Processional at Walt Disney World, appearing most recently in 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2021. 
Benson can be heard on over a dozen recordings. Her animated TV series include the Emmy Award-winning Camp Lazlo for Cartoon Network, The Little Mermaid, Batman Beyond, The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy, The Wild Thornberrys, Barbie, Hercules: Zero to Hero, P. J. Sparkles, and the series Sofia the First for Disney.
On the concert stage, Benson has performed as a concert soloist with symphonies all over the world, including The Boston Pops, The Philly Pops (conductor: Peter Nero), The Hollywood Bowl Orchestra (conductor: John Mauceri), The National Symphony (conductor: Marvin Hamlisch), Cleveland, Dallas, Tokyo, and the San Francisco and Chicago Symphonies. She starred in the Kennedy Center Honors for Ginger Rogers, and in Disney's Premiere in Central Park with Pocahontas, The Walt Disney World 25th Anniversary Spectacular and Disney's 100 Years of Magic. Benson is the resident guest soloist for the Walt Disney Company/Disney Cruise Line and ambassador for feature animation.
On June 6, 2016, Benson performed the role of Ariel at the Hollywood Bowl's concert performance of The Little Mermaid. She also made a special appearance in ABC's 2019 live musical spectacular The Little Mermaid Live! Benson was originally going to reprise her role as Sam in the 2022 film Disenchanted, but her scene was cut from the movie. She recently lent her voice to Ariel in the 2022 video game Disney Dreamlight Valley as well as singing as Ariel on various Disney Princess albums of the 2000s. From 1992 to 2011 she was the official voice of Barbie for Mattel and Pixar for projects such as Toy Story and Dance! Workout with Barbie, until the role was taken over by Kate Higgins starting with the series Life in the Dreamhouse.
In June 2023, Benson starred as Mama Rose in a concert production of Gypsy alongside her daughter Delany at the Barbara B. Mann Performing Arts Hall in Fort Myers, Florida. The two of them reprised their roles in a 2025 production at the OFC Creations Theatre Center in Rochester, New York. Benson portrayed Dolly Gallagher Levi in a concert production of Hello, Dolly! at the Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts in Orlando, Florida from June 21-22, 2024. 


=== The Little Mermaid ===

In late 1986, Benson first heard of the audition for The Little Mermaid through lyricist and playwright Howard Ashman. The two had just worked together in the Broadway show Smile until its run ended early. Ashman knew she would be the perfect fit for the role and that she would be a great replica of Ariel. After hearing the demo for "Part of Your World", she sang a small part of it on tape where it was later sent to Disney executives. Before her audition for The Little Mermaid, she was primarily a stage actress. It was Ashman's first Disney project. In early 1988, Benson won the role of Ariel and has been voicing her ever since. Benson also made a cameo in the 2023 live-action adaptation of the film, directed by Rob Marshall, as a market vendor who hands Ariel (Halle Bailey) a fork during her tour of the kingdom.


== Personal life ==
Benson dated actor Ray Benson while experiencing a religious conversion. They got married in 1984, and eventually had two children, a son (born 1999) and a daughter (born 2001). An article originally published in 2013 said the couple "live north of Atlanta, GA."  In May 2024, Benson revealed to 11 Alive News in connection with her upcoming appearance at MomoCon in Atlanta that she lives in the Lake Lanier area.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


=== Theme parks ===


== Stage ==


== Discography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Jodi Benson at IMDb
Jodi Benson at the TCM Movie Database
Jodi Benson at the Internet Broadway Database 
Jodi Benson at the Disney Legends Website
Performance Working in the Theatre seminar video at American Theatre Wing.org, April 1992