Loren Dean (born July 31, 1969) is an American actor who has appeared on stage and in feature films, including as the title character in Billy Bathgate, as well as Apollo 13, Rosewood, Space Cowboys, and Ad Astra. He appeared in a recurring role on the television series Bones.


== Early life ==
Loren Dean Jovicic was born July 31, 1969, in Las Vegas, Nevada to Elayne (née Rosoff) and Jovicic.  His parents divorced when he was a small child. His mother won custody of Loren, and the family moved to Los Angeles, California. When visiting his father, the two often went to the movies—which Dean says led to his love of film. His childhood was a difficult one, and he ran away from home when he was 16 years old. He graduated from Santa Monica High School in Santa Monica, California, in 1986.
Dean moved to New York City to pursue an acting career. After two years, a friend introduced him to an agent, and he  began appearing in stage plays in New York. He won a Theatre World Award in 1989 for his Off Broadway debut in the play Amulets Against the Dragon Forces at the Circle Repertory Company. He is a playwright and one of Academy Award-winning screenwriter John Patrick Shanley's favorite actors, having appeared in many of the author's plays, notably 4 Dogs and a Bone and Beggars in the House of Plenty.
Dean became an animal lover during his time in New York.


== Career ==
Dean's first film was 1988's Plain Clothes. He made his big break a year later, cast as a bad ex-boyfriend in Say Anything... starring John Cusack. His third film, the 1991 crime drama Billy Bathgate, cast him in a leading role alongside Nicole Kidman, Dustin Hoffman and Bruce Willis.
Dean was lauded for his role as a cocaine-addicted, has-been movie star who is accidentally re-launched on the road to fame and fortune by a fan in Starstruck. Variety noted that Dean "nails his role with precision". He was lauded for his performance as a mysterious small-town psychologist in Mumford (1999).
Much of his acting career has been in supporting roles. His films include Apollo 13 (1995), How to Make an American Quilt (1995), Gattaca (1997), Enemy of the State (1998), and Space Cowboys (2000). Dean has appeared in independent films including The War Bride and The Poker Club, and several well-received television miniseries including The Bronx Is Burning). He played Russ, the brother of Temperance "Bones" Brennan on the TV series Bones. He had a recurring role on the 2010 crime drama Terriers. In 2011, Dean starred in the made-for-television movie Who Is Simon Miller? The film, which aired on NBC, was financed by Procter & Gamble and Walmart as one of their quarterly "Family Movie Night" films. Each film is designed to present wholesome values with almost no violence, sex, or drug use.
Dean has supported filmmakers behind the scenes as well. In 1999, he was a juror for the third annual Shorts International Film Festival.


== Impersonated by conman ==
Loren Dean has been repeatedly impersonated by suspected con artist Loren Dean Breckenridge III. The Sheriff's Department in Orange County, California, has accused Breckenridge of impersonating Dean and defrauding drug rehabilitation centers across the United States, as well as committing the theft of $75,000 in Marin County, California. Breckenridge was  arrested for impersonating White Zombie drummer Phil Buerstatte.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Loren Dean at IMDb
Theatre World Award winners