Miyu Tomita (富田 美憂, Tomita Miyū; born November 15, 1999) is a Japanese voice actress and singer. She is signed to Amuse. After aspiring to become a voice actress while studying in elementary school, she participated in two voice acting auditions in 2014, winning one of them. Some of her roles include Otako in Please Tell Me! Galko-chan, Yume Nijino in Aikatsu Stars!, Gabriel White Tenma in Gabriel DropOut, Riko in Made in Abyss, Rizu Ogata in We Never Learn, Miko Iino in Kaguya-sama: Love Is War, Chuatury "Chuchu" Panlunch in Mobile Suit Gundam: The Witch from Mercury Matsuri Kazamaki (female) in Ayakashi Triangle and Karane Inda in The 100 Girlfriends Who Really, Really, Really, Really, Really Love You.


== Biography ==
Tomita was born in Saitama Prefecture on November 15, 1999. She first became interested in voice acting while in elementary school, after watching the anime series Vampire Knight. She also became a fan of voice actor Mamoru Miyano during this time. During her high school days, she was a member of her school's manga research club. In addition to her interest in voice acting, Tomita-san holds a black belt in karate, having trained in karate for six years. She was a finalist in the Ani-Tan voice acting audition held in 2014, and in the same year won the Grand Prix at the 2014 Voice Actor Artist Development Program Selection audition. She debuted as a voice actress in 2015, voicing a number of minor roles in the anime television series Himouto! Umaru-chan, including voicing the protagonist Taihei Doma during a flashback.
In 2016, Tomita was cast in her first major role as Otako in the anime television series Please Tell Me! Galko-chan, where she also performed the opening theme together with Azumi Waki and Minami Takahashi. She was also cast as the character Yume Nijino in the anime television series Aikatsu Stars!, where she narrated a commercial for the series. During the same year, she was also cast in the anime film Garo: Divine Flame as Roberto Lewis. In 2017, Tomita-san was cast as Gabriel White Tenma in the anime television series Gabriel DropOut. Together with co-stars Saori Ōnishi, Naomi Ōzora, and Kana Hanazawa, she performed the opening theme "Gabriel Dropkick" and ending theme "Hallelujah Essaim". Tomita-san portrayed the role Kuina Natsugawa in the anime television series Hinako Note. She made her major debut as a singer under Nippon Columbia with the release of the single "Present Moment" on November 25, 2019; the title song is used as the opening theme to the anime series After School Dice Club. Her official fanclub, "+ you" (pronounced "plus you"), was launched on the same day as the launch of her first album, Prologue, on June 30, 2021.


== Filmography ==


=== Anime ===
2015
Is the Order a Rabbit?? as classmate A (episode 8)
Himouto! Umaru-chan as Taihei Doma (young, episode 7), female student (episodes 3–4)
2016
Please Tell Me! Galko-chan as Otako
Aikatsu Stars! as Yume Nijino
2017
Gabriel DropOut as Gabriel White Tenma
Hinako Note as Kuina Natsukawa
Made in Abyss as Riko
Garo: Vanishing Line as Luke (child)
2018
Overlord II as Tina
Holmes of Kyoto as Aoi Mashiro
Ms. Vampire Who Lives in My Neighborhood as Sophie Twilight
2019
The Magnificent Kotobuki as Chika
We Never Learn as Rizu Ogata
Wasteful Days of High School Girls as Minami "Yamai" Yamamoto
After School Dice Club as Midori Ono
Aikatsu on Parade! as Yume Nijino
Z/X Code reunion as Yuni Tsukigata
2020
Haikyū!! as Akane Yamamoto
Hatena Illusion as Yumemi Hoshisato
A Certain Scientific Railgun T as Mitori Kōzaku
Interspecies Reviewers as Crimvael
Dorohedoro as Ebisu
Tamayomi as Ibuki Kawaguchi
Kaguya-sama: Love Is War? as Miko Iino
Iwa-Kakeru! -Sport Climbing Girls- as Nonoka Sugiura
One Room Third Season as Akira Kotokawa
Kuma Kuma Kuma Bear as Shuri
Talentless Nana as Yūka Sasaki
Dogeza: I Tried Asking While Kowtowing as Kanan Misenai, Rei Shioya
2021
Otherside Picnic as Akari Seto
The Hidden Dungeon Only I Can Enter as Emma Brightness
Ex-Arm as Yggdrasil
Vivy: Fluorite Eye's Song as Momoka Kirishima
Combatants Will Be Dispatched! as Alice Kisaragi
Battle Athletes Victory ReSTART! as Shelley Wong
2022
Sabikui Bisco as Tirol Ōchagama
Miss Kuroitsu from the Monster Development Department as Melty
Shadowverse Flame as Tsubasa Takanashi
Skeleton Knight in Another World as Chiyome
In the Heart of Kunoichi Tsubaki as Tōwata
Kaguya-sama: Love Is War – Ultra Romantic as Miko Iino
Onipan! as Noriko Issun
The Rising of the Shield Hero 2 as Kizuna Kazayama
Classroom of the Elite as Shiho Manabe
Made in Abyss: The Golden City of the Scorching Sun as Riko
My Stepmom's Daughter Is My Ex as Isana Higashira
Smile of the Arsnotoria the Animation as Little Alberta
Prima Doll as Gekka
Shine Post as Homare Torawatari
The Maid I Hired Recently Is Mysterious as Natsume Nakashima
Mobile Suit Gundam: The Witch from Mercury as Chuatury Panlunch
Shinobi no Ittoki as Satomi Tsubaki
Tabi Hani as Akari Yashima
2023
Farming Life in Another World as Flora
Endo and Kobayashi Live! The Latest on Tsundere Villainess Lieselotte as Fiene
Ayakashi Triangle as Matsuri Kazamaki (female)
KamiKatsu as Beltran (female)
KonoSuba: An Explosion on This Wonderful World! as Funifura
Too Cute Crisis as Sasara Azuma
Reborn as a Vending Machine, I Now Wander the Dungeon as Shui
The 100 Girlfriends Who Really, Really, Really, Really, Really Love You as Karane Inda
Butareba: The Story of a Man Turned into a Pig as Ceres
2024
Delicious in Dungeon as Mickbell
My Instant Death Ability Is So Overpowered as Tomochika Dannoura
Sasaki and Peeps as Elsa
'Tis Time for "Torture," Princess as Vanilla Peschutz
The Witch and the Beast as Helga Velvet
Jellyfish Can't Swim in the Night as Kiui Watase
Gods' Games We Play as Mysterious Beautiful Girl
Our Last Crusade or the Rise of a New World Season II as May
2025
The Daily Life of a Middle-Aged Online Shopper in Another World as Myarey
Please Put Them On, Takamine-san as Rurika Kurosaki
Kamitsubaki City Under Construction as Hastaa
Dusk Beyond the End of the World as Amoru
May I Ask for One Final Thing? as Nanaka
Touring After the Apocalypse as Airi
Umamusume: Cinderella Gray as Ellerslie Pride
2026
Kamiina Botan, Yoeru Sugata wa Yuri no Hana as Yaeka Kitamori
An Observation Log of My Fiancée Who Calls Herself a Villainess as Bertia
Magical Girl Raising Project: Restart as Detec Bell


=== Original video animation (OVA) ===
2024
Code Geass: Rozé of the Recapture as Haruka Rutaka


=== Films ===
2016
Aikatsu Stars! as Yume Nijino
Garo: Divine Flame as Roberto Lewis
2019
Made in Abyss: Journey's Dawn as Riko
Made in Abyss: Wandering Twilight as Riko
KonoSuba: God's Blessing on this Wonderful World! Legend of Crimson as Funifura
2020
Made in Abyss: Dawn of the Deep Soul as Riko
High School Fleet: The Movie as Sachiho "Sunny" Chiba
2022
Kaguya-sama: Love Is War – The First Kiss That Never Ends as Miko Iino
2024
My Oni Girl as Tsumugi


=== Video games ===
2016
Granblue Fantasy as Chloe
2018
Onsen Musume as Hinata Kinugawa
Shōjo Kageki Revue Starlight -Re LIVE- as Lalafin Nonomiya
Valkyrie Connect as Frigg
2020
Idolmaster Cinderella Girls: Starlight Stage as Akira Sunazuka
Arknights as Kafka
2021
Assault Lily Last Bullet as Himeka Sadamori
Blue Archive as Shimiko Endo
Smile of the Arsnotoria as Petit Albert
Azur Lane as USS New Jersey (BB-62)
Closers as Shizuku Hoshino (Eunha)
2022
Fire Emblem Warriors: Three Hopes as Protagonist (Female) / Shez (Female)
Genshin Impact as Layla
Made in Abyss: Binary Star Falling into Darkness as Riko
Samurai Maiden as Komimi
2023
Towa Tsugai as Hachidori
Fuga: Melodies of Steel 2 as Socks Million
Echocalypse as Lumin
2024
Dead or Alive Xtreme Venus Vacation as Meg
2025
Majogami as Shiroha


=== Dubbing ===
Apple of My Eye as Bailey Andrews
The Returned as Victor


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (in Japanese)
Official agency profile (in Japanese)
Miyu Tomita  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia