Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll ( shə-KEER-ə, Spanish: [ʃaˈkiɾa isaˈβel meβaˈɾak riˈpol]; born 2 February 1977) is a Colombian singer-songwriter and dancer. Referred to as the "Queen of Latin Music", she has had a significant impact on the musical landscape of Latin America and has been credited with popularizing Hispanophone music on a global level, which in turn contributed to increased learning and use of the Spanish language worldwide. The recipient of various accolades, she has won 4 Grammy Awards and 15 Latin Grammy Awards, including 3 Song of the Year wins.
Shakira made her recording debut with Sony Music Colombia at the age of 14. Following the commercial failure of her first two albums, Magia (1991) and Peligro (1993), she rose to prominence with the next two, Pies Descalzos (1995) and Dónde Están los Ladrones? (1998). Shakira entered the English-language market with her fifth album, Laundry Service (2001), which sold over 13 million copies worldwide, becoming the best-selling album of all time by a female Latin artist. Her success was further solidified with the Spanish-language albums Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 (2005), Sale el Sol (2010), El Dorado (2017), and Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran (2024), all of which topped the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart, making her the first woman with number-one albums across four different decades. Her English-language albums Oral Fixation, Vol. 2 (2005), She Wolf (2009), and Shakira (2014) received platinum certifications in various countries worldwide.
Shakira is one of the world's best-selling musicians. She scored numerous number-one singles and other top songs worldwide, including "Estoy Aquí", "Antología", "Ciega, Sordomuda", "Ojos Así", "Whenever, Wherever / Suerte", "Underneath Your Clothes", "Objection (Tango)", "La Tortura", "Las de la Intuición", "Hips Don't Lie", "Beautiful Liar", "She Wolf", "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)", "Loca", "Rabiosa", "Can't Remember to Forget You", "Dare (La La La)", "La Bicicleta", "Chantaje", "Te Felicito", "Monotonía", "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", and "TQG". Shakira served as a coach on two seasons of the American singing competition television series The Voice (2013–2014), had a voice role in the animated films Zootopia (2016) and Zootopia 2 (2025), and executive produced and judged the dance competition series Dancing with Myself (2022). She is credited with opening the doors of the international market for other Latin artists. Billboard named her the Top Female Latin Artist of the Decade twice (2000s and 2010s).
Shakira has written or co-written a vast majority of the material she recorded or performed, music and lyrics, during her career. Noted to be an "international phenomenon" whose music, story, and legacy "resonate in every corner of the globe", Shakira has been described as an artistic link between the West and the East for popularizing Middle Eastern sounds in the West, and Western sounds in the East. For her philanthropic and humanitarian work, such as the Barefoot Foundation, and her contributions to music, she received the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year and Harvard Foundation Artist of the Year awards in 2011. Shakira was appointed to the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanics in the United States in 2011, and was granted the honor of Chevalier of the Order of Arts and Letters by the French government in 2012. She has been an advocate for equitable development of the Global South, the rights and interests of children, the Latino minority in the U.S. and Canada, women, and other under-represented groups.


== Early life ==
Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll was born on 2 February 1977 in Barranquilla, Colombia. Her name means "thankful" in Arabic. She is the only child of William Mebarak Chadid and Nidia Ripoll Torrado. Her grandparents are of Spanish and Lebanese descent. Shakira's great-grandmother on her father's side emigrated to Sincelejo, Colombia, from Lebanon. After establishing in Colombia, Shakira's grandmother was born; she gave birth to Shakira's father, William, in New York City. When he was around five, his family moved back to Colombia. Shakira's grandfather on her mother's side, Tomás Eduardo Ripoll, was born in Barranquilla whereas her grandmother, Josefina Torrado Núñez, was born in Ábrego. The Spanish surname Torrado of her grandmother on her mother's side is Catalan and originates from four brothers who immigrated from Catalonia to coastal Colombia in the 19th century. Shakira has stated that she also has distant Italian roots through an ancestor with the surname Pisciotti. Her father was born to a Lebanese Christian family. She was raised Catholic and attended Catholic schools. Shakira has eight older half-siblings from her father's previous marriage. She spent much of her youth in Barranquilla, a city located on the northern Caribbean coast of Colombia.
Shakira wrote her first poem, titled "La Rosa de Cristal" ('The Crystal Rose'), when she was only four years old. As she was growing up, she was fascinated watching her father writing stories on a typewriter and prayed for one for herself when she was seven. She kept writing poems and her mother thought she would become an author. As her music interests crystallized, the poetry turned into song lyrics. When Shakira was two years old, her half-brother was killed at the age of nineteen, in a motorcycle accident. Six years later, writing lyrics on her typewriter and having been given a guitar by her aunt, she composed her first song, titled "Gafas Oscuras" ('Dark Glasses'). It was inspired by her father, who for years wore dark glasses to hide his grief.
Shakira grew up in reasonably comfortable family conditions until her father, a jeweler, went bankrupt when she was eight. Her parents sent her to stay for a while with relatives in Los Angeles. When she came back, their two cars, furniture and color TV were gone and she had to adjust to a different reality. She was able to buy her parents a car when she was 14, after receiving some money for the release of the Magia album.
When she was four, Shakira's father took her to a local Middle Eastern restaurant, where she first heard the doumbek, a traditional drum of Middle-Eastern music, used to accompany belly dancing. Spontaneously, she climbed onto a table and started to dance; soon she wanted to do it for anyone who would watch. At her Catholic school, she demonstrated belly dancing on every Friday morning, encouraged by her parents, teachers and students in the audience, who were convinced of her bright future as a performer. "Just her, singing and dancing on the stage", recalled a former classmate. However, in second grade, Shakira was rejected for school choir because, according to the music teacher, her vibrato was too strong; classmates told her she sounded like a goat. She was often sent out of class because of her hyperactivity. To make Shakira appreciate more the modest conditions of her upbringing, her father took her to a local park so she could see orphans who lived there. The images stayed with her and she said to herself, "one day I'm going to help these kids when I become a famous artist". Having regained some confidence in her singing, she entered a local TV station talent contest when she was ten and won the top prize, a bicycle.
Between the ages of ten and thirteen, Shakira attended various events around Barranquilla and gained some recognition singing and dancing in the area. She met local theater producer Monica Ariza, who was impressed with her and tried to help her career. During a flight from Barranquilla to Bogotá, Ariza convinced Sony Music Colombia executive Ciro Vargas to hold an audition for Shakira in a hotel lobby. Vargas held Shakira in high regard and, having returned to the Sony Music Colombia office, gave the recorded cassette to a song and artist director. However, the director was not enthusiastic and thought Shakira was something of "a lost cause". Undaunted and still convinced that Shakira had talent, Vargas set up an audition in Bogotá. He arranged for Sony Music executives to be present, with the idea of surprising them with Shakira's performance. She performed three songs and impressed the executives enough to be signed, at the age of 13, for the recording of three albums.


== Career ==


=== 1990–1994: Beginnings ===
Shakira's debut album, Magia, was recorded with Sony Music Colombia from 1990, when she was 13. The songs are a collection composed by her since she was eight and by others, mixed pop rock ballads and disco uptempo songs with electronic accompaniment and some live musicians. The album was released in June 1991 and featured her debut single "Magia", written by Shakira, released with a music video, as were two of the other three singles, "Sueños" (by Shakira) and "Esta Noche Voy Contigo" (by Miguel Enrique Cubillos). Though Magia fared well on Colombian radio and gave Shakira much exposure, it was not a commercial success as only 1,200 copies were sold in Colombia. Little known outside of her native Colombia at the time, Shakira was invited to perform at Chile's Viña del Mar International Song Festival in February 1993. The festival gave aspiring Latin American singers a chance to present their songs and the winner was chosen by a panel of judges. Shakira's performance of the ballad "Eres" brought her the trophy for third place. Young Ricky Martin was one of the judges and voted for her to win.
Shakira's second studio album, Peligro, was released in March 1993. More developed than Magia, it lists many musicians who participated in the recordings and has fuller sound. "Tú Serás la Historia de Mi Vida", written by Desmond Child, is featured with a video; "Eres" (Shakira's song), "Peligro" and "Brujería" (the two composed by Eduardo Paz, who also produced the record) are among Peligro's songs. Shakira was still not pleased with the final result, taking issue mainly with the production. The album was better received than Magia had been, but Shakira's refusal to advertise or promote it contributed to another commercial failure. Of the eighteen songs on Magia and Peligro, ten were written by Shakira. In the last track of Peligro, titled "1968", Shakira sings about the years of political upheaval and liberation before she was born and wonders what she might have missed not being there. She calls for a reclamation of the rebellious spirit lost since that time. In her later work, Shakira generally did not refer to or perform songs from the first two albums. In 1993–1994, she starred in the Colombian TV series El Oasis.
Shakira originally recorded her song "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?" (later included on her album Pies Descalzos) for the compilation album Nuestro Rock Volumen II, released in Colombia in 1994. The song became a hit in Colombia.
Having been moved up in her class work ahead of her age, Shakira graduated from a convent secondary school when she was 15, but her professional involvement in music prevented her from continuing formal education. At the Colegio La Enseñanza that she attended, the nuns expected students to visit the poorest areas of the town and help teach reading and writing to unschooled children there, which gave Shakira one of her early exposures to child poverty issues. "The seeds of their education are well-planted in my system. I believe in God. I believe in the sacraments" – Shakira told the interviewer in 2002.
On starting her career so early, she later said: "I wouldn't have done anything different myself [...] though I think I missed out on adolescence. I never misbehaved when I was a teenager and that's something you've got to do. I was so focused on my goals. I was already an adult when I was 14. Maybe I'll have a belated adolescence when I'm old".


=== 1995–2000: Breakthrough with Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones? ===
Recording for Pies Descalzos, Shakira's third studio album and her international debut album, started in February 1995, after the success of her song "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?". Its reception motivated Sony Music Colombia label to commission Shakira to produce a complete rock album. She did songwriting and recording with Luis Fernando Ochoa, her principal music collaborator for next three albums: Pies Descalzos, The Remixes and Dónde Están los Ladrones?. Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones? are Shakira's most important albums. The Remixes, mostly Pies Descalzos music redone as dance pieces, is a highly popular album where Shakira showcases newly recorded songs and vocals, while Ochoa demonstrates his instrument playing and music production skills. DJ Memê (Marcello Mansur) remixed many of the songs. With Pies Descalzos, Shakira began using musical influences from a number of world regions and genres, the trend she continued and cultivated later in her career.
The Pies Descalzos album was released in October 1995. It reached number five on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Albums chart. The album spawned six hit singles: "Estoy Aquí", which reached number two on the U.S. Latin chart, "¿Dónde Estás Corazón? which reached number five on the U.S. Latin chart, "Pies Descalzos, Sueños Blancos" which reached number 11 on the U.S. Latin chart, "Un Poco de Amor" which reached number six on the U.S. Latin chart, "Antología" which reached number 15 on the U.S. Latin chart, and "Se Quiere, Se Mata" which reached number eight on the U.S. Latin chart. Pies Descalzos achieved top ranking in eight countries, and in August 1996 RIAA certified the album platinum status in the U.S.
Of the eleven songs on Pies Descalzos album, all list Shakira as the first author and Luis F. Ochoa as the second one; the same is true regarding the twelve tracks on The Remixes. Pies Descalzos lists Ochoa as the "music and artistic producer".
In October 1995, Shakira commenced Tour Pies Descalzos, her first international tour. Its 118 shows took two years to complete. Among Shakira's remarkable recorded stage performances of that era are the initial 6 October 1995 Concierto de Lanzamiento de Pies Descalzos in Bogotá, Colombia, the 22 November 1996 Tour Pies Descalzos concert at Mexico City's Auditorio Nacional attended by 10,000 spectators, and the 1997 Viña del Mar International Song Festival concert in Chile. Ochoa was responsible for musical and artistic production during the tour, with Shakira's co-production. Besides singing, dancing and speaking to the assembled (she values communications very highly and has said that her most important treasure is "words"), Shakira played the guitar and, prominently at that time, harmonica. Her singing and movements reflected an "angry-young-woman-rock attitude", enthusiastically applauded by her audiences. "Vuelve" was the opening rock anthem salvo at concerts of the tour. 
In 1997, Shakira received three Billboard Latin Music Awards for Album of the Year for Pies Descalzos, Video of the Year for "Estoy Aqui", and Best New Artist. Pies Descalzos eventually sold over 5 million copies. Its success prompted the release of a remix album titled The Remixes, of which over one million were sold. The Remixes also included Portuguese language versions of "Estoy Aquí", "Un Poco de Amor" and "Pies Descalzos, Sueños Blancos", which were recorded as a result of Shakira's success in the Brazilian market, where Pies Descalzos sold nearly one million copies. Even before becoming fluent in English, Shakira learned Portuguese and was able to converse with her hosts on her visits to Brazil. At 19, Shakira was the best-selling female pop rocker in Latin America. She was named a national cultural ambassador by the president of Colombia, a distinction she shares with writer Gabriel García Márquez.
Dónde Están los Ladrones?, Shakira's fourth studio album, was released in September 1998. It was recorded at the Miami studio of Gloria and Emilio Estefan. Artistic production was done by Shakira with Emilio Estefan listed as the executive producer. The album's name was inspired by an incident at an airport where a suitcase containing Shakira's written lyrics was stolen. Dónde Están los Ladrones? became an even bigger worldwide hit than Pies Descalzos. The album had reached a peak position of number 131 on the U.S. Billboard 200 and held the top spot on the U.S. Latin Albums chart for 11 weeks. Over 7 million copies were sold worldwide, including 1.5 million in the U.S., making it one of the best selling Spanish albums there. Eight singles were taken from the album: "Ciega, Sordomuda", "Moscas en la Casa", "No Creo", "Inevitable", "Tú", "Si Te Vas", "Octavo Día", and "Ojos Así". "Ciega, Sordomuda" and "Tú" reached number one on the U.S. Latin chart, but it was "Ojos Así", together with its Arabic connotations and a striking video, that had become a truly global hit. The song infused elements of Arabic pop.
Of the eleven songs on Dónde Están los Ladrones?, all were created primarily by Shakira again. Music of five was co-written by Ochoa and there were other music co-authors, except for "Moscas en la Casa" and "Que Vuelvas", accredited to Shakira only.
In 1999, Shakira received a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Latin Rock or Alternative Album. Her first live album, MTV Unplugged, was recorded in New York City as MTV Unplugged's first Spanish language broadcast on 12 August 1999 and released in early 2000. The performance was highly acclaimed by American critics; the album topped the Latin charts and sale statistics. (There is, however, a Sony Pictures DVD titled SHAKIRA – TOUR PIES DESCALZOS. It depicts her at 1997 Festival Viña del Mar.) In March 2000 Shakira embarked on Tour Anfibio, a two-month series of concerts in Latin America and the United States. In August 2000, she won an MTV Video Music Award in the category of People's Choice – Favorite International Artist for "Ojos Así". In September 2000, Shakira performed "Ojos Así" at the inaugural ceremony of the Latin Grammy Awards, where she was nominated in five categories: Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for MTV Unplugged, Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for "Octavo Día", Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for "Ojos Así", and Best Short Form Music Video for the "Ojos Así" video. MTV Unplugged became there the first in a series of albums that have earned Shakira an album Grammy.
Dónde Están los Ladrones? was a very effective presentation of Shakira's strong-willed persona and her self-analysis; it enhanced her already tremendous popularity with her female fans. A stage goddess who sang about heartbreak and alluded to government corruption with "intimate, rhapsodic lyrics", she became an "irreverent leader of [...] rockeras" in Latin America and among its diaspora. The two studio albums indicated that Shakira's artistic identity was mutable and, after MTV Unlugged, "having reached the ceiling of Latin music" and taking it over as its "bonafide superstar", she was ready for a change. To establish herself as a global phenomenon, she had to record in English and pursue a full-fledged career in the United States.


=== 2001–2004: Laundry Service and English transition ===
Upon the successes of Dónde Están los Ladrones? and MTV Unplugged, Shakira began working on an English crossover album. Her manager, Emilio Estefan, took an early notice of Shakira's unprecedented, among Latin American artists, potential for a "crossover" into the enormous U.S. music market because of her "universally catchy pop-rock melodies, cerebral lyrics, unwavering self-determination and natural sex appeal". Shakira's English language skills were improved with the help of Gloria Estefan. As Latin music sales were growing in the U.S. at twice the total industry rate, Tommy Mottola, head of Sony Music, referred to Shakira as an "absolutely brilliant artist" and predicted Latin music to be the global reservoir of talent in the future.
"Whenever, Wherever", called "Suerte" in the simultaneously published Spanish language version, was released at the end of August 2001 as the first and lead single from Shakira's fifth studio album. The song took heavy influence from Andean music, including the charango and pan flute in its instrumentation. It became an international success by reaching number one in most countries. In the U.S., it reached number six on the Hot 100.
The new album, titled Laundry Service in English-speaking countries and Servicio de Lavanderia in Latin America and Spain, was released on 13 November 2001. Servicio de Lavanderia features the same songs, arranged in different order. Nine out of thirteen tracks Shakira sings in English. The album debuted at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, selling over 200,000 records in its first week. It was later certified triple platinum. It had established, for the most part, Shakira's musical presence in the mainstream North American market. "Underneath Your Clothes", "Objection (Tango)", "The One", "Te Dejo Madrid", "Que Me Quedes Tú", and "Poem to a Horse" were other Laundry Service songs issued as singles. Shakira's best-selling album ever comprises a number of hits, but its greatest strength and biggest selling point was "Whenever, Wherever" / "Suerte".
Tommy Mottola, Freddy DeMann and other "music industry's heftiest heavyweights have invested in Shakira's North American conquest". The Billboard magazine Latin Bureau chief Leila Cobo spoke of Laundry Service and its release: "Shakira was a totally foreign artist" (as opposed to U.S. Latin home-grown stars), but Cobo expected the record to do very well as "there was such a huge marketing push behind it, and the album had a very big budget, the video had a very big budget. It was a priority for the label". Shakira wrote or co-wrote each of the songs and Laundry Service was produced by her alone.
The rock and Spanish dance-influenced album, created for the English-language market, gained mild critical success, with some critics claiming that Shakira's English skills were too weak for her to write songs in that language. Rolling Stone stated that "she sounds downright silly" in English and "Shakira's magic is lost in translation". A similar view was expressed by Elizabeth Mendez Berry in Vibe: "While her Spanish-language albums sparkled with elegant wordplay, this record is rife with cliches, both musically and lyrically [...] for Anglophone Latin lovers, Shakira's lyrics are best left to the imagination". A reviewer form The Guardian took a broader view, however, noting that the critics need to be open-minded regarding the lyrical sensibilities of Spanish: "Ripoll (Shakira) is not struggling with the intricacies of English, just expressing herself in a singular and puzzling way. Good for her". Laundry Service had become the best-selling album of 2002 and eventually more than 15 million copies were sold worldwide. In Chicago Tribune, journalist Joshua Klein, while not uncritical of aspects of Shakira's stagecraft as displayed at the United Center in January 2003, characterized her "international ascent" as "multilateral, multicultural and cooperative". Klein wrote of Shakira who dyed her dark hair blond, "enlisted Gloria Estefan's husband to help her with her crossover mission", and produced a "so resolutely middle-of-the-road" current batch of music. According to him, the singer emphasized theatrics over artistic integrity and craft, but she also "dedicated much of her set to her Spanish songs", "briefly played politics" and "played up her place as a girl-power icon".
Freddy DeMann took over Shakira's management from Emilio Estefan in 2000 and negotiated for her a multi-million dollar global promotional deal with Pepsi. Shakira released four songs for Pepsi: "Ask for More", "Pide Más", "Knock on My Door", and "Pídeme el Sol". Laundry Service: Washed and Dried album (CD and DVD) was issued in 2002. It comprises some remixes and alternative versions of songs from the original collection. Sony Music released Shakira's Spanish greatest-hits compilation, Grandes Éxitos.

    
At Aerosmith's MTV Icon in April 2002, Shakira performed "Dude (Looks Like a Lady)". Also in 2002, she joined Cher, Whitney Houston, Celine Dion, Mary J. Blige, Anastacia, and the Dixie Chicks for VH1 Divas Las Vegas. In August, she performed "Objection (Tango)" at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards and won the International Viewer's Choice Award with "Suerte / Whenever, Wherever". She also won the Latin Grammy Award for the category of Best Short Form Music Video for the Spanish version of "Objection (Tango)"). In October, she won five MTV Video Music Awards Latin America for Best Female Artist, Best Pop Artist, Best Artist – North (Region), Video of the Year (for "Suerte"), and Artist of the Year. In November 2002, Shakira embarked on the Tour of the Mongoose and 61 shows took place by May 2003. The tour was her first worldwide tour, as legs were played in North America, South America, Europe, and Asia. A CD and DVD live album, Live & off the Record, was released in 2004; three million sets were sold worldwide. It commemorated the Tour of the Mongoose.
Asked in 2002 if she would be the Madonna for the new millennium, Shakira said, "To be as big as Madonna, it takes too much [...] I don't think I want to be jumping on the stage when I'm 40 [...] By then, I might be so tired that I just want to get a farm and plant onions and tomatoes".
Having decided on the "crossover", Shakira had to face artistic and social issues and pressures, compromise, accept and cope with an adjustment of her status. "The biggest rock star in Latin America, a mystically revered performer", in the U.S. she "felt under the microscope", reduced from goddess to a striving pop star. "In countries like Mexico, where I'm established as an artist, I have the privilege or the luxury to fail, or to make mistakes. Here, [..] I don't think I do", she told Evan Wright in 2002. She told him that she would give birth, eventually, to two boys. Spending time increasingly in the U.S., Shakira ended up replacing all the (Latin) musicians of her original rock bands and hiring others, some of whom turned out to be the permanent core of her new crews.


==== "Crossover" issues ====
The initial idea was to translate the lyrics of Dónde Están los Ladrones? into English with the help of Gloria Estefan and publish it as an English language album. But as the language-talented and hard-working Shakira grew more comfortable with her English, she decided to create a new album from scratch. She worked on it for a year, secluded on the farm in Uruguay and at a rented house in the Bahamas.
Having opted now for musical stylistic "fusion", she told the Colombian newspaper El Tiempo in 2001: "Fusion offers me the opportunity to remove any type of label people want to place on me. It gives me freedom...I don't want to be tied to a specific style and become the architect of my own prison".
Laundry Service, the "crossover" transition process and its manifestations created a rift among Shakira's followers. Some wanted her to remain an independent, outspoken and introspective diva they had worshiped, whereas others demanded that she conforms to the prevailing commercial standards of the music industry and its fashions. A "deeply racialized debate" ensued concerning the malleability and authenticity of the artist. The "tensions and conflicting desires between Latinx, Latin American and Anglo audiences" of Shakira had become apparent. The new album's detractors considered the singer a sellout and claimed that her now blond hair, English language singing and new look showed that she was "abandoning her essence" and "transforming into a whiter, sexier version of herself", one more "palatable for Anglo audiences". A fan wrote, "she's got to dye her hair blond and bare her body [...] to succeed in the United States".
Shakira insisted that her only motivation for blonding her hair was her own vanity. Regarding the disgruntled fans, who had accused her of downplaying her Latin identity, she replied: "I'm so sure of what I represent for my people and of what I am. I know that my roots are very well-planted in Latin America. And I feel proud of being Colombian and Latin, and I say it out loud to the rest of the world every time I can." The reaction of "her people" to the new album, she said, had been "amazing".
Like other young foreign female artists in the U.S. music industry, "Shakira faced constant sexualization and exotification". Some have argued that the singer "exploited these tropizalizing tropes of Latinas, buying into collective fantasies for greater visibility". Shakira's (assumed by her as a role or by her audiences as a perception) "identity as a white, blonde Latina facilitated her explosive entry into the English-language market", wrote Isabelia Herrera. "Her whiteness allowed her to play off and against these tropes, particularly through the mediums of movement and dance, furthering her ascent to the upper echelons of pop."
As for the political narrative about Latin artists' success in the mainstream North American market ("cross-cultural exchange"), Herrera said it "is lauded as an antidote to political and social oppression". "Laundry Service exhorts us to rethink the utility of the crossover narrative—who it is designed for and who it liberates, if anyone", she concluded.
In her 2024 review of Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran, Boutayna Chokrane wrote: "There's a fan for every era of Shakira—some who expect her to adhere to Anglophone pop molds, some who pine for her rockera past. Since her debut, she has inspired debate about Latine stereotypes and the nature of cultural authenticity".


=== 2005–2007: Fijación Oral, vol. 1 and Oral Fixation, vol. 2 ===

Preparing for her next productions, Shakira wrote sixty songs, in Spanish and in English. Out of these, she selected twenty to be used in two albums, separated by language. First she "charmed" the present wider, English-speaking and global audience of hers, over to the Spanish side.
The lead single from Shakira's sixth studio album, the Spanish Fijación Oral, vol. 1, named "La Tortura" (music co-written by Luis Fernando Ochoa), was released in April 2005 and featured Spanish balladeer Alejandro Sanz. For a record 25 weeks, it remained on the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart. "La Tortura" reached number 23 on the Hot 100, number one in Spain and enjoyed high rankings across the world. Shakira and Sanz, who sang "La Tortura", and Daddy Yankee, were the first ever artists to perform Spanish-language songs at the MTV Video Music Awards; it happened at the 2005 edition of the Awards in Miami.
Fijación Oral, vol. 1, released in June 2005, was very well received in North America, South America, and Europe. It debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 157,000 copies in its first week and becoming the highest U.S. debut ever for a Spanish-language album. It has since sold over two million copies in the U.S., earning an 11× Platinum (Latin field) certification from the RIAA. The album earned certifications in Latin America already a day after its release. In Venezuela, it earned a Platinum certification, in Colombia, a triple Platinum certification, while in Mexico demand exceeded shipments and it became unavailable after one day of sales. A top album in Spain, Italy, Greece and Germany, it received high ratings also in many other countries. Four more singles were released from Fijación Oral, vol. 1: "No", "Día de Enero", "La Pared", and "Las de la Intuición". The album has sold over five million copies worldwide. On 8 February 2006, Shakira was granted her second Grammy Award with the win of Best Latin Rock/Alternative Album. She received four Latin Grammy Awards in November 2006, winning in the categories of Record of the Year and Song of the Year for "La Tortura", Album of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Album for Fijación Oral, vol. 1.
Shakira's second English album and seventh studio album, Oral Fixation, vol. 2, was released in November 2005. It debuted at number five on the Billboard 200, selling 128,000 copies in its first week. It went on to sell 1.8 million records in the U.S. and over eight million worldwide.

The lead single for Oral Fixation, vol. 2, "Don't Bother", in the U.S. missed the top 40 on the Hot 100. In most countries worldwide, it reached the top 20. "Hips Don't Lie", which featured Wyclef Jean, was released as the album's second single in February 2006. It became Shakira's first number one single on the Billboard Hot 100. The song reached the number one spot in over 55 other countries and acquired the status of worldwide biggest-selling single of the 21st century. Shakira and Wyclef Jean also recorded the "Hips Don't Lie - Bamboo" version. It was sung by them at the closing ceremony of the 2006 FIFA World Cup. The third and final single from the album, "Illegal", which featured Carlos Santana, was released in November 2006.
Shakira embarked on Oral Fixation Tour, which comprised 120 shows that took place between June 2006 and December 2007; five continents were visited. In 2006, she was honored with the Billboard Spirit of Hope Award for her Fundación Pies Descalzos. In February 2007, she performed at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards and earned the nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for "Hips Don't Lie" with Wyclef Jean. Shakira's third live album, Oral Fixation Tour, was released in November 2007.
In late 2006, Shakira and Alejandro Sanz sang "Te Lo Agradezco, Pero No" as a duet; the song is featured on Sanz's album El Tren de los Momentos. "Te Lo Agradezco, Pero No" was a top ten hit in Latin America and topped the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart. Shakira also collaborated with Miguel Bosé on the duet "Si Tú No Vuelves", which was released in Bosé's album Papito. The American R&B singer Beyoncé and Shakira worked together on the track "Beautiful Liar", which was released in 2007 as the second single from the deluxe edition of Beyoncé's album B'Day. In April, the single jumped 91 positions on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, from 94 to 3, setting the record for the largest upward movement in the history of the chart at the time. It was also number one on the official UK singles chart. "Beautiful Liar" earned them a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals. The song and its video marked Shakira's first all-female collaboration. In 2007 she participated, together with 23 other female singers, in the recording of Annie Lennox's song "Sing" from the album Songs of Mass Destruction. Also in 2007, Shakira and Wyclef Jean recorded their second duet, "King & Queen". The song was featured on Jean's album Carnival Vol. II: Memoirs of an Immigrant.
Shakira wrote the lyrics and co-wrote the music for two new songs that are featured in the movie Love in the Time of Cholera (2007), based on the novel of the same title by Colombian author and Nobel Prize winner Gabriel García Márquez. García Márquez himself asked Shakira to write the songs. The songs that Shakira sang in her film soundtrack debut were a version of "Pienso en ti" from her 1995 album Pies Descalzos, "Hay Amores" and "Despedida". "Despedida" was nominated for Best Original Song at the 65th Golden Globe Awards.


=== 2008–2009: She Wolf ===

In early 2008, Forbes named Shakira the fourth top-earning female artist in the music industry. In July, she signed a $312 million contract with Live Nation Entertainment, an international touring conglomerate, which was to remain in effect for ten years. According to the artist, the deal would encompass tours, recordings, sponsorship and merchandise worldwide. Her existing contract with Epic Records (Sony Music Entertainment) called for three more albums – one in English, one in Spanish, and a compilation, but the touring and other rights under the Live Nation contract were to begin immediately.
On 17 May 2008, before an audience of over 150,000 people, Shakira was one of the artists who performed at the ALAS Foundation charity concert in Buenos Aires. Invited by Alejandro Sanz, she led the presentation of his song "No Es lo Mismo". Mercedes Sosa, Shakira and Pedro Aznar performed there a cover of Silvio Rodríguez's song "La Maza". On 18 January 2009, Shakira was among the participants of the "We Are One" festivities in honor of the inauguration of President Barack Obama, at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C. She sang "Higher Ground" with Stevie Wonder and Usher. In March 2009, a studio recording of "La Maza" by Sosa featuring Shakira was released on Sosa's album Cantora, un Viaje Íntimo.
In July 2009, Shakira released "She Wolf" as the lead single from an upcoming album with the same title. The single was a commercial success, receiving certifications in 17 countries. Her eighth studio and third (mostly) English album She Wolf was released in October 2009. It received mainly positive reviews from critics. Mike Diver on BBC Review saw in it "perhaps the most enjoyably varied pop album of 2009" but detected "a greater sense of passion in songs playing out in her native tongue". Beyond the chart-conquering smashes, Shakira had "often explored some truly mind-boggling pop territories, deep-drilling for veins of inspiration absolutely alien to so many of her peers". She Wolf was included in AllMusic's year-end "Favorite Albums," "Favorite Latin Albums," and "Favorite Pop Albums" lists. It reached number one on the charts of Argentina, Ireland, Italy, Mexico, and Switzerland. It also charted inside the top five in Spain, Germany, and the United Kingdom. It debuted at number fifteen on the Billboard 200. It was certified double-platinum in Colombia and Mexico, platinum in Italy and Spain, and gold in numerous countries including France and the United Kingdom. Over two million copies were sold worldwide, making She Wolf less successful in terms of sales than Shakira's other albums. Four singles were released off the album: "She Wolf", "Did It Again", "Give It Up to Me", and "Gypsy". "Good Stuff" was released as the album's sole promotional single. The heavily electronic She Wolf record was produced by Shakira.


=== 2010–2015: "Waka Waka", Sale el Sol and Shakira ===
In 2010, Shakira collaborated with the South African Afro fusion band Freshlyground to create the official song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)" is based on a Cameroonian folk-song called "Zangaléwa". With lyrics written in Fang and other languages, it was performed by the group Golden Sounds from Cameroon. The Golden Sounds' hit originated in turn from traditional Cameroonian soldiers' marching chant. Released on 7 May 2010, "Waka Waka" was then performed by Shakira at the World Cup kick-off and closing. According to her, the FIFA World Cup "represents an event that has the power to unite and integrate, and that's what this song is about". The "Waka Waka" single reached the top 20 in countries of Europe, South America and Africa and the top 40 in the U.S. "Waka Waka" sold more than four million copies worldwide and became the biggest-selling World Cup song of all time.
For her involvement with the World Cup related campaigns and other philanthropic work, Shakira received the 2010 Free Your Mind MTV award. On that occasion, she thanked "all the people around the world who joined me with the Waka Waka and who danced for the cause of promoting universal education so that millions of children living in the developing world can have a chance at their own dreams."
Following the success of the "international smash hit" "Waka Waka", in October 2010 Shakira released the mostly-Spanish Sale el Sol, her ninth studio album. It received critical acclaim and was included in AllMusic's Favorite Albums of 2010 and Favorite Latin Albums of 2010 year-end lists. At the 2011 Latin Grammy Awards ceremony, Sale el Sol was nominated for Album of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Album, winning the award in the latter category. Commercially, the album was a success throughout Europe and Latin America. It peaked atop the charts of Belgium, Croatia, France, Mexico, Portugal, and Spain. In the United States, it debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200 chart, marking the highest debut for a Latin album for the year; it was Shakira's fifth album to peak at number one in the Latin albums category. According to Billboard, 35% of its first-week sales were digital. Sale el Sol peaked at number one on both the Top Latin Albums (remained number one there for twelve weeks) and Latin Pop Albums charts, due in part to strong digital sales. The lead single, "Loca", was number one in many countries. "Sale el Sol", "Rabiosa", "Antes de las Seis", and "Addicted to You" were also released as singles. The Sale el Sol album, produced by Shakira, has sold ten million copies since its release.
In September 2010 Shakira embarked on Sale el Sol World Tour, in support of her two most recent albums. Countries in North America, Europe, South America, Asia, and Africa were visited, with 106 shows in all. The tour was met with positive reactions from critics, who praised Shakira's stage presence and energy. In August 2011, she participated in an episode of Dora the Explorer animated TV series. A song titled "Todos Juntos" by Dora, featuring Shakira, was released with a music video. Promoted with the single "Je l'aime à mourir", in December 2011 Shakira's fourth live album, Live from Paris, was released.

On 9 November 2011, Shakira was honored as Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year for her artistic achievements and philanthropic undertakings; she was the youngest of the musicians who had had received this distinction. At the Mandalay Bay Events Center in Las Vegas, she was showered with expressions of praise and numerous artists performed versions of her songs. She herself sang a cover of Joe Arroyo's "En Barranquilla Me Quedo", as a tribute to the singer who had died earlier that year. In early 2012, Shakira signed to Roc Nation as her management for the upcoming studio album. She collaborated with rapper Pitbull for the song "Get It Started", which was slated to be the lead single from his 2012 album Global Warming. The single was released in June 2012. In September 2012, it was announced that Shakira and Usher would replace in March 2013 Christina Aguilera and CeeLo Green as coaches for the fourth season of the U.S. TV show The Voice. Shakira served also on the sixth season of the vocal competition series. In January 2013, Ivete Sangalo released "Dançando", a single featuring Shakira, off Sangalo's album Real Fantasia. In February 2013, Draco Rosa released "Blanca Mujer", a duet he sang with Shakira as a promotional single for his album Vida.
Shakira originally intended to release a new album in 2012, but plans to release a single and video were postponed due to her pregnancy. In December 2013 it was announced that Shakira's new single, "Can't Remember to Forget You", a duet with Rihanna, would be issued in January 2014. Shakira, the artist's self-titled tenth studio album, produced by her, was released in March 2014. Commercially, the album debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart with first-week sales of 85,000 copies. Because of that, Shakira became the singer's highest-charting album on Billboard 200, although it also had her lowest first-week sales figure for an English-language album. The album spawned three singles. After releasing "Can't Remember to Forget You" and "Empire", RCA chose "Dare (La La La)" as the third single. The song "Medicine" was released as a promotional single off the album. The World Cup version of "Dare (La La La)", featuring Brazilian musician Carlinhos Brown, was also officially released. On 13 July 2014, Shakira performed "La La La (Brazil 2014)" with Carlinhos Brown at the 2014 FIFA World Cup closing ceremony at the Maracanã Stadium in Rio de Janeiro. It was her third consecutive appearance at a FIFA World Cup.


=== 2016–2021: El Dorado and El Dorado World Tour ===
Shakira's work on her eleventh studio album, the mostly Spanish El Dorado, had been in progress from the latter part of 2015. Among her other projects was starring as a voice actress in the 2016 animated movie Zootopia. She voiced a character named Gazelle and sang a song titled "Try Everything". In May 2016, she collaborated with Colombian singer Carlos Vives on the track "La Bicicleta", which subsequently won the Latin Grammy Award for Record of the Year and Song of the Year. On 28 October 2016, Shakira released the single "Chantaje" with Colombian singer Maluma; the song was a track from the upcoming El Dorado. It became her most-viewed YouTube video, with over 2.1 billion views as of 1 June 2018. Maluma had previously created a remix to "La Bicicleta". Shakira was featured on the single "Comme moi" by French rapper Black M. "Comme moi" and its English version were also included on El Dorado. On 7 April 2017, the song "Me Enamoré" was released as the second official single from El Dorado.
The El Dorado album, produced by Shakira, was issued on 26 May 2017. "Perro Fiel" featured American singer Nicky Jam. Its official release as El Dorado's third single took place on 15 September, the same date its music video, filmed in Barcelona, was premiered. Before being released as a single, "Perro Fiel" was already certified gold in Spain. "Trap" was released in January 2018 as the fourth single off the album and Shakira's second collaboration with Maluma. In January 2018, Shakira won her third Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album for El Dorado; it made her the only female Latin artist to have done so. The album also earned her a top Latin Grammy and she was recognized by a number of other prizes. With El Dorado, she had received thirteen Grammys overall, including ten Latin Grammys. El Dorado had over 10 billion streams, which made it one of the most-streamed female albums of all time.
The El Dorado World Tour was announced on 27 June 2017. The European and U.S.–Canada dates were published; the Latin American dates were to be announced later. It was to be sponsored by Rakuten. Other announced partners of the tour were Live Nation Entertainment's Global Touring Division (which had previously collaborated with Shakira on The Sun Comes Out World Tour and which would "produce" the present tour) and Citi, which facilitated the pre-sale of tickets through its Private Pass program.
The tour was scheduled to begin on 8 November in Cologne, Germany, but because of "strained vocal cords" related problems the singer experienced during rehearsals (she became unable to sing), the date was canceled one day before the concert, due to be rescheduled. On 9 November, postponements were announced also for the shows in Paris, Antwerp and Amsterdam. On 14 November Shakira let her fans know, through her social networks, that she had suffered a haemorrhage on her right vocal cord in late October and needed to rest her voice for some time to recover. "My voice [...] was my identity", she told The Guardian. "So when I couldn't sing, that was unbearable. There were times I couldn't even get out of bed. I was so depressed."
In January 2018, Shakira announced new dates for the El Dorado World Tour, which started in Hamburg on 3 June. The same month, she released "Clandestino", a collaboration with Maluma, as a standalone single. The European leg of the tour ended in Barcelona on 7 July. After the performances in Asia on 11 and 13 July, the tour was continued in North America. It started on 3 August in Chicago and finished in San Francisco on 7 September. The Latin American shows began in Mexico City on 11 October and ended in Bogotá, Colombia, the tour's last stop, on 3 November. A total of 54 concerts took place. At the age of 41 (some had already spoken of her "longevity" as a headline artist), Shakira did stage performances, with all her dancing, running and jumping, largely by herself, without back-up dancers.
On 3 November 2018, "Nada" was released as the fifth and final single off El Dorado. In October 2019, Shakira was featured on a remix of Camilo and Pedro Capó's single "Tutu". Shakira's fifth live album, Shakira in Concert: El Dorado World Tour, was released in November 2019. It was her first album available as digital download only. Forbes ranked Shakira among the world's highest-paid women in music in 2019, at number 10. In January 2020, she released "Me Gusta", a collaboration with Puerto Rican rapper Anuel AA.
On 2 February 2020, Shakira and Jennifer Lopez performed at the Super Bowl LIV halftime show. According to Billboard, the halftime show had a viewership of 103 million people, while 102 million watched the game itself. It was the most viewed halftime show by then on YouTube. Shakira called attention to the Afro-Colombian community by doing a traditional champeta dance break. She and Lopez appeared again in the finale of the event, jointly singing Waka Waka.
In May and June, Shakira participated in two television specials performing her songs during the COVID-19 pandemic: The Disney Family Singalong: Volume II (with "Try Everything") and Global Goal: Unite for Our Future (with "Sale el Sol"). In December 2020, she teamed up with Black Eyed Peas on the single "Girl Like Me", written as a tribute to Latin women.
In January 2021, Shakira sold her catalog of 145 songs (publishing rights) to Hipgnosis Songs Fund. As the COVID-19 pandemic largely eliminated live performance earnings for top musicians, a number of them, beginning with Bob Dylan, sold their catalogues of songs, and Shakira followed that trend. On 16 July 2021, she released a single titled "Don't Wait Up".


=== 2022–2024: Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran ===
On 21 April 2022, Shakira and Puerto Rican singer Rauw Alejandro released the song "Te Felicito" as the lead single of her upcoming but at that time yet unnamed twelfth studio album. On 19 May, for her accomplishments as a songwriter and musician, she was granted the Special International Award with Apple Music at the British Ivors Academy's Ivor Novello Awards. During the 67th annual edition of "The Ivors", 21 composers in 14 categories were recognized. On 31 May, the dance competition show Dancing with Myself, on which Shakira served as an executive producer and judge alongside Liza Koshy and Nick Jonas, premiered on NBC. The series was canceled after one season. In June, the song "Don't You Worry" by Shakira, Black Eyed Peas and David Guetta, was released. "Monotonía", Shakira's collaboration with Puerto Rican singer Ozuna, was released in October as the second single of her forthcoming album. In the "heartbreak" song and video, Shakira deals with the pain she incurred upon the breakup of the relationship with her partner and father of her children, Spanish footballer Gerard Piqué. "Monotonía" became the most-successful Spanish language debut of 2022 and the biggest female solo debut on YouTube; it was also the biggest song debut in Shakira's career. In November, Shakira and Alejandro were nominated for Record of the Year with "Te Felicito" at the 23rd Annual Latin Grammy Awards.
On 11 January 2023, the single "Shakira: Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53" was released; the song was composed and produced as a collaboration with Argentine DJ Bizarrap. It reached number one in 16 countries, achieved 14 Guinness World Records, and peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Shakira's fifth top-ten in the U.S. and her first in over 15 years, since "Beautiful Liar" (2007). She became the first woman in U.S. history to debut a Spanish language track in top-ten of the chart. The song reached number two on the Billboard Global 200 and Global Excluding U.S. charts. "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53" is a diss track aimed at Shakira's ex-partner, Gerard Piqué. Its lyrics are direct and explicit to the degree not found in Shakira's earlier work or in pop music in general. She characterized the role of this song-making process for her as catharsis, relief and healing. The lyrics, music and visual productions of "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53" are strongly influenced by the hip-hop genre of art. The song achieved record-breaking success on streaming services, and had a measurable cultural impact.
On 24 February 2023, the single ″TQG″ by  Karol G and Shakira was released. It became Shakira's sixth top-ten, second top-ten of 2023, and highest-debuting single in the U.S. at number 7. It broke the Guinness World Record for the highest-charting Spanish language track by a woman in the U.S. The song debuted atop the Global 200, becoming both her and Karol G's first number one. Shakira released "Acróstico" on 11 May as the fifth single from her upcoming album. A second version of the song, featuring vocals from her children Milan and Sasha, was released three days later. In June, "Copa Vacía" with Colombian singer Manuel Turizo followed as the next single of the record. On 29 July 2023, Shakira became the first woman in history to occupy the top three spots on the Latin Pop Airplay chart with "TQG" at the summit, "Acróstico" at number two and "Copa Vacía" at number three. In September, she released "El Jefe", a collaboration with American regional Mexican band Fuerza Regida, as the seventh single of her forthcoming album. According to Emma Harrison of Clash, "El Jefe" "pays tribute to the working class and their struggles as they aspire for a better life".
On 12 September, Shakira received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards and performed a medley of her hits as the recipient; she became the first South American artist to receive the accolade. At the 24th Annual Latin Grammy Awards, she received seven nominations, including Record of the Year and Song of the Year. Shakira became the first artist in the award show's history to receive three nominations for Song of the Year in a single ceremony—with "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", "TQG", and "Acróstico". She won Song of the Year and Best Pop Song for "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53" and Best Urban/Fusion Performance for "TQG".
The all-Spanish Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran album was released on 22 March 2024 through Sony Music Latin. It lists Shakira as the producer. According to a Billboard reviewer, the "Colombian hitmaker" is "vulnerable and raw" in "her most personal LP to date". Speaking of her first studio album in nearly seven years, after El Dorado (2017), Shakira called the creative process "alchemical" and that it turned her "tears into diamonds" and her "vulnerability into strength". The album received generally positive reviews from music critics. Variety wrote of the singer who "solidified herself as a pillar of international pop stardom", "fully invests in these cross-genre marvels" and "makes a grand re-entrance into society after what she's openly called the 'darkest hours' of her life". Shakira "rejoices in the experimentation and liberation of the new school she helped build". According to a Clash writer, she "effortlessly turns pain into art", "combining latin, rock and hip-hop". Shakira's new album was "revelatory, raw but resplendent throughout", a "fitting testimony to her strength and resilience". Rolling Stone noted that "in a crowded Latin music landscape, the international pop icon's first album in 7 years reaffirms her relevance and dominance". The New York Times wrote that the record continued Shakira's "career-long penchant for pulling together music and collaborators from across the Americas, dipping into rock, electro-pop, trap, Dominican bachata, Nigerian-style Afrobeats and regional Mexican cumbia and polka". "The she-wolf is all over this album. The she-wolf is what helped me rebuild myself", Shakira told the reporter, referring to the important symbolic concept of hers that goes back to the song of that name. Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran debuted at number 13 on the U.S. Billboard 200, with 34,000 album-equivalent units sold during its first week. It debuted atop the Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts, making Shakira the first woman with number one albums across four decades on the Billboard Latin album charts. It was certified seven-times platinum (Latin) upon release.
"Puntería", sung with American rapper Cardi B, was released as the eighth single in tandem with the album. It reached number one on the Latin Airplay chart and topped the Latin Pop Airplay chart for nine weeks. "(Entre Paréntesis)", done with regional Mexican band Grupo Frontera, was issued as the ninth and final single from the record, on 25 March. The song reached the summit of the Latin Airplay and Regional Mexican Airplay charts, extending Shakira's record as the woman with the most leaders on the former chart (23) and earning her first chart-topper on the latter.
On 26 March, the day after she appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, Shakira conducted a free pop-up concert in New York's Times Square. The event was announced only hours prior to its beginning but gathered an enthusiastic crowd estimated at 40,000. Shakira celebrated the release of Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran, performing with her dancers and musicians "Hips Don't Lie" and songs from the new album.


=== Since 2024: Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran World Tour ===
On 12 April 2024, at Coachella Festival in California, Shakira joined Bizarrap onstage, to give at his invitation a surprise guest performance during his set. She sang their collaborations "La Fuerte" and "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53". She announced there the Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran World Tour, her first tour since 2018, in support of the album.
On 14 July, Shakira gave a performance at the 2024 Copa América final, Argentina vs. Colombia match, at the Hard Rock Stadium in Miami Gardens, Florida. It was the first such halftime show at a soccer championship game. Association football allows only 15 minute halftime breaks but this one had to be made longer because of Shakira's show. With an assembly of dancers, she sang "Hips Don't Lie", "Te Felicito", "TQG", and "Puntería".
By the fall, a variety of Latin tour ticket sales and concert records had been broken. Many large-venue shows across Latin America were quickly sold out. A number of new ones were added, especially in Mexico at the end of the Latin leg of the tour. Shakira expected the tour to be the greatest in her career. The tour was planned to begin in North America and tickets were sold there, but its U.S.–Canada part, originally scheduled for November and December 2024, was rescheduled to follow, rather than precede, the Latin American leg. The demand for larger stadium venues in the U.S. was given as the reason and many of the shows were moved to locations different from originally intended.
In September 2024, Shakira walked off stage mid-performance at the LIV Miami nightclub, reportedly after noticing fans filming up her dress. On 25 September, she released the single "Soltera". Topping the Latin Pop Airplay chart for seven weeks and reaching number two on Latin Airplay, it tied her with Enrique Iglesias for the most number ones on the former and third-most top-tens on the latter chart. Shakira received three nominations at the 25th Annual Latin Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year for Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran and Song of the Year for "(Entre Paréntesis)". Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran was also nominated for Best Latin Pop Album at the upcoming 67th Annual Grammy Awards.
At the February 2025 Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles, Shakira, in final stages of preparations for her tour, received the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album. She gave a performance and dedicated the award on stage to her "brothers and sisters", immigrants in the United States. At the Grammys she was accompanied by her sons, Milan and Sasha.


==== Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran Tour first Latin American leg ====
After Shakira's first tour concert at Nilton Santos Stadium in Rio de Janeiro on 11 February, Ludmilla Correia of Billboard magazine noted that the artist made heavy investment in the tour and its equipment, including large-scale realistic projections driven by artificial intelligence. Shakira, after her turbulent period, shined with tranquility, Correia wrote, and during the show "seemed to be overflowing with joy, like a child". According to other Billboard writers, "The show is a display of innovation and technology, but also a doctrine of female empowerment, carrying a clear message that has been conveyed through Isabel, the she-wolf, in whom many people have found inspiration for strength and freedom."
Shakira was hospitalized with an abdominal issue that made her cancel a show in Peru. She recovered and performed the following night, 17 February, in Lima. The concert scheduled for 24 February in Medellín, Colombia was canceled, due to safety concerns over a faulty stage roof. As the string of tour disappointments continued, the show in Santiago, Chile on 2 March was called off because of stage safety concerns. There were sold-out concerts scheduled in Santiago for 2 and 3 March, but the floor (ground) on which the 62 ton stage would be installed was found to be uneven and unstable; the second Santiago show also had to be canceled. Upset Shakira wrote an emotional letter to her fans on social media. "Ladies and gentlemen who have kept me company for more than thirty years" – she invoked her followers. The cancellations in Chile and the resulting stress made her ill and medical treatment was necessary before she was able to perform in Argentina. Additional shows that more than compensated for the lost performances were scheduled at affected locations.
According to a ¡Hola! magazine story (10 March 2025), Gerard Piqué "relocated to Miami" to be with his and Shakira's sons during her tour and was seen practicing football with them. The boys were then sent to South America to join their mom, who had reportedly stayed in Uruguay at the mansion of her other former partner, Antonio de la Rúa.
During an interview with Danielle Dithurbide on 27 March, almost three years after the end of Shakira's relationship with Piqué, the singer referred to her emotional state, saying "healing processes take many years" and "I've learned that you can feel joy even while carrying pain—while living with a wound that won't quite heal". After more concert dates in Mexico were announced in March and April, the total number of completed and intended shows there increased to an unprecedented 26, higher than in any other country (21 tour concerts were scheduled in the United States as of 2 April). Shakira spoke of a more "intimate and profound" character of the tour then. The concerts were "deep encounters where healing happens", she said, and with each performance she felt "stronger and happier". For the last two shows of the first leg of the Latin American tour, in Medellín in April, she brought as special guests her past collaborators and fellow Colombians, Maluma and Carlos Vives. Luis Fernando Ochoa joined in on stage on 13 April. Over the years 2025 and 2026, according to Billboard, in addition to the Americas, Shakira planned to take her show to Europe, Asia and the Middle East, so that "her music, her story, and her legacy would resonate in every corner of the globe".


==== Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran Tour in the U.S. and Canada ====
Shakira participated in The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on 6 May 2025, the first of her three appearances there announced for the month. She celebrated the upcoming 20th anniversary of the "Hips Don't Lie" world hit, performing the song with Wyclef Jean, dancers and musicians.
The U.S. and Canada leg of the tour got started on 13 May in Charlotte, North Carolina, with Wyclef Jean, who did the opening act, and Alejandro Sanz as special guests. Fifty chosen accomplished local Latina women walked with Shakira to the stage. On social media, she expressed her satisfaction with the "packed stadium" concert, attended by a sing-along audience.
Shakira performed next on 15 May in East Rutherford, New Jersey, where she sang "Monotonía" with Ozuna. In Montreal, Quebec, Canada she performed on 20 May. The 24 May show in Chicago was part of the Sueños Music Festival. On 29 May, a tour concert at Boston's Fenway Park was canceled for technical (structural safety) reasons, as reported by Live Nation Entertainment. The singer was "devastated" when the 31 May show in Washington, D.C., an opening event of the LGBTQ WorldPride festival, also had to be canceled. After the Boston difficulties, the stage elements could not be transported on time. Fans expressed frustration as the total of six tour concerts had been canceled by the end of May. Unlike other canceled performances, Boston and Washington had not been given new dates. The 13 June show at San Antonio's Alamodome was postponed to 5 July because of technical issues with stage-support infrastructure. The only concert scheduled in the Los Angeles area, planned for 20 June at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, was moved to 4 August, and the second show there, on the following day, was soon announced.
On 23 May 2025, Shakira and Alejandro Sanz released the duet "Bésame", their third collaboration.
On 6 June, the first of two shows in the Miami area, where Shakira has lived on and off for many years, brought to Hard Rock Stadium her music collaborators seen previously in concerts of the tour as well as a number of other celebrity friends, including Gloria and Emilio Estefan and Bizarrap. On 13 June, Shakira talked with a BBC correspondent about "the biggest tour of 2025". She called Miami her home and said her sons were the reason she was alive. Asked about the current situation of immigrants, she said "for an immigrant in the U.S. [...] it means living in constant fear and it's painful to see". She called for the application of "principles of equity and freedom [...] that shaped this nation".
A 7 August concert at Valley Children's Stadium in Fresno, California was added to Shakira's U.S. itinerary. Hugh McIntyre of Forbes suggested that Shakira's "unfortunate moves" ("headline-grabbing cancellations") had actually helped her chart standing, as some of her albums experienced improved rankings on Billboard charts, including the return there of Dónde Están los Ladrones?.
Ahead of her concert in San Antonio, Shakira declared donating part of the event proceeds to the Catholic Charities there for the relief of victims of the deadly floods in Central Texas; she encouraged her supporters to also contribute. On 27 September Shakira performed, as a headlining act, at the Global Citizen Festival in New York City's Central Park.
To celebrate the 30th anniversary of Pies Descalzos and 20th anniversary of the two Oral Fixation albums, Shakira released the recording of a Spotify mini-concert on 22 October. She talked and performed there with guest participation of Luis Fernando Ochoa, Ed Sheeran, Beéle with Colombian musicians, and the New York Philharmonic Chamber Orchestra. The five-track EP features new versions of the songs "Pies Descalzos, Sueños Blancos", "Antología", "La Pared", "Día de Enero", and "Hips Don't Lie".


==== Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran Tour second Latin American leg ====
Two more September dates were announced on 19 June for the second leg of Shakira's tour in Mexico, for a record total of 28 in this country. A record number of one million tickets sold in Mexico during the current world tour was reported on 31 July. 33 concerts had been scheduled for the remainder of 2025, in Mexico and other Spanish-speaking countries of Latin America, beginning with a Tijuana show on 11 August.
"Shakira took her kids to meet Antonio de la Rúa", wrote ¡Hola! magazine on 20 August. The report referred to a restaurant dinner in San Diego at which Shakira's brother Tonino was also present.
Shakira hosted her first female guest artists of the tour in Mexico City, singing "Soltera" with Danna on 26 August and "Día de Enero" with Belinda on 30 August. An emotional Belinda knelt before Shakira to express her love and heartfelt gratitude for being invited to perform together. De la Rúa was seen seated in the audience, listening to the song that had originally been dedicated to him.
At the end of October, Billboard declared the Las Mujeres tour to be the highest-grossing Latin tour by a woman ever, with $327.4 million generated and 2.5 million tickets sold. For December, additional shows were announced in Argentina and Florida, and still more were added in Mexico in February 2026.


== Artistry ==

Music executive Freddy DeMann, who managed Shakira's career from early 2000, spoke of her: " I was blown away by how gorgeous she was in person. She's a brilliant songwriter. She has an unbelievable voice; her vocal instrument is phenomenal and unique. She dances better than anyone out there, and she writes her own songs, sings her own songs, and she actually plays her own instruments. And she produces her own music. She's the whole package".


=== Music influences and styles, works ===
Shakira has been characterized as a "legacy artist". "The Colombian hitmaker", wrote the Billboard reviewers, "is intentional in her songwriting with raw lyrics, meticulous as a producer and an extraordinary performer bringing to life the songs that define not only her eras but those of women across generations." Her texts relate to women and their vulnerabilities. "Pushing the envelope" with "Se Quiere, Se Mata" on Pies Descalzos, "she sang about the dangers women face with unsafe abortions when there's no legal option". Shakira's vocal style was described as "warbling", her songwriting as "confessional", and the content of her verbal creations as "poetic". Her music is "underpinned by two things: rock guitar and Latin rhythms".
In 2017, Deutsche Welle journalist Kate Müser commented on Shakira's "globalized sound": (her) "Latin beats, spiced with Middle Eastern and other world elements and made comfortably familiar by being churned through the pop machine, make you feel like a citizen of the world". Müser quoted the Rolling Stone magazine's comparison of Shakira with her contemporaries and rivals, American female pop idols: "the stylistic breadth of Shakira's music – elements of folk, Middle Eastern and traditional Latin styles over a foundation of rock and pop – gave her a degree of credibility the American teen queens lacked". (Shakira's) "globalized sound could be a healthy escape [...] in times where national boundaries are being fiercely defended and cultural differences become points of contention", she wrote.


==== Black hair rock era of Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones? ====

From her early teens, Shakira was influenced by rock music, listening heavily to such bands and performers as Led Zeppelin, Metallica, Nirvana, The Beatles, the Police, The Cure, Tom Petty, and Aerosmith. According to Shakira, "Underneath Your Clothes" (2001) is where she shows her devotion to music of the Beatles. "I was so in love with that rock sound" – she said. Her other influences included Madonna, Sheryl Crow, Alanis Morissette, Janis Joplin, Billie Holiday, Marc Anthony, and Van Morrison. She cited Depeche Mode's "Enjoy the Silence" as the song that made her appreciate the power of the electric guitar and  "kick started her passion for music".
Shakira recalled her early convictions as follows: "There was no doubt for me, ever. Call it a premonition, call it an instinct. I was born to do this, to connect with a wide audience. The calling I have is the same reason why a dog barks. I always knew I would be a big performer and a public figure". Yet, she is a person of extreme humility, "hesitant to take credit for her own success", "bonded with her massive audience by sharing with them their awestruck worship of her public persona". She credited Gloria Estefan for "opening a big heavy door that was closed for many years" for Latin musicians in the United States, facilitating the kind of progress that Shakira herself was able to make later.
As Lucas Villa wrote in October 2020, "25 years ago [...] a raven-haired rockera from Barranquilla, Colombia made her mark" with a "LP called Pies Descalzos, or 'Bare Feet'. With full creative control, 18-year-old Shakira bared her soul, and the world was introduced to her strikingly poetic lyricism". In the 1998 Dónde Están los Ladrones? album, she blended Latin rock with elements of pop and Middle Eastern music, lyrics and dance influences that reflected her Lebanese heritage. After so many years of artistic and personal evolution of the "girl with the electric guitar", Villa said, the "free-spirited Shakira essence remains the same". [...] "Shakira is still that rockera. She's still that pop star."
Shakira's orthodox rock skills were on display most prominently during her original Tour Pies Descalzos. Its 118 shows lasted for two years, from October 1995 to October 1997 (for example, the 1996 Tour Pies Descalzos concert at Mexico City's Auditorio Nacional, or the Viña del Mar 1997 concert in Chile). Then during Tour Anfibio (2000), and then again, in different rock renditions, during  the Tour of the Mongoose (2002–2003), of which the Rotterdam concert was published as the Live & off the Record record set.
Shakira's earlier albums, from "her black-haired rock era", Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones?, are primarily rock with elements of folk music. Pies Descalzos (1995), featuring assertive sound, "direct lyrics and personal aesthetic", utilizing aspects of reggae, dancehall, bossa nova and bachata among its styles, "put Shakira on the map internationally". The album's anthems are "Estoy Aquí" (the "I'm Here" opening, reassuring declaration of the artist), "Antología", "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?", "Pies Descalzos, Sueños Blancos", "Se Quiere, Se Mata", "Un Poco de Amor" (sung and danced with Howard Glasford, then with Adjetey Osekre), "Te Necesito", "Quiero", "Vuelve", "Te Espero Sentada" (bossa nova), and "Pienso en Ti", sung at tour performances in an expanded version.
In 1996, Shakira gave a very different, classic and "elegant" ballroom-dance performance at a Banco Popular de Puerto Rico function.
In Dónde Están los Ladrones? (1998), Shakira "unleashes a maelstrom of infectious energy" with a mesmerizing voice of which there is no other, "a deep vibrato" that "leaves listeners spellbound". She displays her "bohemian rockera persona" and, through "powerful balladry" and "lyrical depth with incisive social commentary", demonstrates wisdom beyond her age. "Her songwriting shines throughout" in "Ciega, Sordomuda", a song that "defined the sound of Latin music going into the new millennium" (mariachi-utilizing music written jointly with Estéfano), and on such tracks as "Moscas en la Casa", "No Creo", "Inevitable", "Octavo Día", "Tú", "Si Te Vas", "Dónde Están los Ladrones?", or "Que Vuelvas". The closing  "Ojos Así" (music co-written by Pablo Flores and Javier Garza, music video directed by Mark Kohr) is famous for its "boundary-pushing musical fusion" as well as modern Arabic and other dance routines, done by Shakira and the background dancers and displayed on the song's video.


==== Laundry Service ====
With her first mostly-English album, Laundry Service (2001), and later works, Shakira diversified into various pop music genres, pop rock and Latin pop. Laundry Service is a pop and rock album, impacted by other genres and styles. The singer credited this to her mixed ethnicity and background, saying: "I am a fusion. That's my persona. I'm a fusion between black and white, between pop and rock, between cultures – between my Lebanese father and my mother's Spanish blood, the Colombian folklore and Arab dance I love and American music." Shakira was the first Latin crossover artist who attained critical acclaim from the mainstream U.S. rock press. She claimed that her motivation for entering the English-speaking market was strictly intellectual: being exposed to new cultures, building bridges, growing as a person. "I just feel that my playground is larger now. I now talk to different cultures and I hope that I can bridge those gaps and differences between us. It's an adventure, a dream... I feel like I'm on an anthropological mission"—she told Ted Kessler of The Observer in July 2002. On the day she spoke to him, Shakira had 18 interviews followed by other scheduled activities, which Kessler characterized as "promotional treadmill", even if "poetically romanticized" by the singer.
The Arabic music and Middle Eastern music elements exerted high influence on "Ojos Así", a world hit from Dónde Están los Ladrones?. Its English version "Eyes Like Yours" was included on Laundry Service. Musical styles from different South American countries surface on the album. Tango, a style of fast-paced ballroom dance that originated in Argentina, Shakira sings in its rock version, "Objection (Tango)" / "Te aviso, te anuncio (tango)". The uptempo track features a bridge in which Shakira delivers "a genuinely peculiar rap". The Guardian reviewer Alexis Petridis marveled at Shakira's lyrics: "thought-provoking lines", "bewildering lyrical iceberg" and "non sequiturs so eccentric", all rendered with an unyielding conviction by "her powerful voice leaping octaves to add emphasis". He then sarcastically observed that "sniggering media pundits have suggested Ripoll (Shakira) can't actually understand what she is singing". The rock piece "Poem to a Horse" "mixes Nirvana-influenced guitars with a soul horn section to mind-boggling effect". Petridis found Laundry Service's "ramshackle production and imponderable lyrics" to be "striking and unique".
Shakira said in 2002: "My music, I think, is a fusion of many different elements. And I'm always experimenting. So I try not to limit myself, or put myself in a category, or... be the architect of my own jail." She had been inspired by the music of Asia, and in particular by Indian music, which influenced her works, including dancing. Proud of her Arab ancestry, she told Portuguese TV "Many of my movements belong to Arab culture." South American folk music, especially Andean music, had influenced her and she had used its native instrumentation, most notably in "Whenever, Wherever" / "Suerte", Shakira's grand anthem and the song which "established her as a global superstar" (its music was co-written by Tim Mitchell, English words by Gloria M. Estefan). In the Spanish and English videos, the artist features "her signature iconic hip-swiveling dance moves". Laundry Service also includes the dance-pop track "Ready for the Good Times", the ballad "The One, "Underneath Your Clothes" (music co-written by Lester Mendez), "Que Me Quedes Tú", and other songs.
According to Isabelia Herrera, the "Underneath Your Clothes" (a power ballad) video "was the Colombian singer's self-aware introduction to Anglo audiences" and the intentionality of its beginning (the verbal exchange with the journalist who asks her to speak English) "was the crux for her metamorphosis into an international supernova". Herrera wrote of Shakira's "inimitable warble" in her singing, that she excels "in her meditations on erotic power" and that "through power ballads and post-grunge vengeance, Shakira empties her body, harnessing anguish and devotion and tracing a blueprint for so many young people's journeys of femme self-discovery". She called Laundry Service "a formidable compendium of Shakira's sonic and corporeal world".
Laundry Service established "Shakira's legacy as a pop chameleon". Her later forays into different music genres "can be traced back to the hybrid vision initiated" on her crossover album.


==== Fijación Oral, vol. 1, Oral Fixation, vol. 2 and She Wolf ====
The Spanish language Fijación Oral, vol. 1 (2005) features "La Tortura" with Alejandro Sanz, reggaeton beats and dancehall elements. The popular song was played also on English language stations. The album consists mostly of pop songs. Besides "La Tortura", "No", "Día de Enero" and "Las de la Intuición were issued as singles. Music of the last highly melodic synth-pop song and of "La Tortura" was composed jointly by Shakira and Luis Fernando Ochoa. There are also the ballads "La Pared" in two versions and "Día Especial". The classic "Obtener un Sí" is a tribute to traditional bossa nova. The whole album was produced by Shakira.
The English Oral Fixation, vol. 2 (2005), a sister album, followed and brought Shakira back "into mainstream pop and rock". The outstanding and most successful song of the set is "Hips Don't Lie" with Wyclef Jean. It mixes salsa with reggaeton and cumbia and utilizes a sample by Jerry Rivera. "Don't Bother" represents continuity of Shakira's work with guitar rock, while "Illegal" brings collaboration with Carlos Santana. On Oral Fixation she explores, as usual, "new musical territories". Several of the songs represent "off the beaten path", unconventional but striking pop/rock, with the sometimes underappreciated Shakira's English lyrics, for example "How Do You Do", "Costume Makes the Clown", or "Animal City". The last piece comes with music co-written by Luis F. Ochoa and includes an intriguing contraposition of rock guitars and Latin horn section, utilized among other seemingly disparate musical elements. Music for the ballad "Something" was also co-written by Ochoa. Cabaret-like sounding "Hey You" and the romantic ballad "Your Embrace" have music co-written by Tim Mitchell. Music of the ballad "Dreams for Plans" was co-written by Brendan Buckley. Lyrics and music of the protest song "Timor" are by Shakira alone. Vol. 2 was also produced by Shakira.
She Wolf (2009) is primarily an electropop album that contains, in the first place, the "She Wolf" celebrated anthem and its Spanish equivalent "Loba". With its electronic, clubby sound ("in keeping with the current dancefloor-friendly sounds of Rihanna, Lady Gaga and Beyoncé"), the album contrasts sharply with the music Shakira had released before. The English and Spanish versions of the "She Wolf" song came with videos, in which the 32-year-old singer proffers a "more unabashedly sexed-up presentation". The Billboard reviewer wrote of "a bluntness to her urges only hinted at in her previous work". According to Shakira, "She Wolf" represented her being "a little more in touch with my desires and a little more empowered or encouraged to satisfy those desires and set them free. It's something that just comes with time. I probably would not have written a song like this when I was 20". Whereas Shakira ostensibly preached female sexual liberation, the "She Wolf" song had become an anthem for the LGBTQ movements, which the artist has supported. As for the She-wolf character, Shakira said "I think people are craving fantasy". She termed She Wolf a "sonic experimental trip" and said she researched folk music from different countries, including "Oriental and Hindu music, dancehall, etc." Among the songs on the record, there are "Good Stuff", the Spanish and Oriental in character "Años Luz" or "Why Wait", "Did It Again" or "Lo Hecho Está Hecho", and "Men in This Town", which possibly epitomizes the intended club dance spirit of the album.


==== Sale el Sol and Shakira ====
Shakira's next album, the mostly-Spanish Sale el Sol (2010), was meant to be a return to her beginnings and is therefore very different from its predecessor. It comprises ballads, rock songs, and Latin dance songs. Reggaeton, merengue and cumbia are among the styles utilized in the eclectic album. The English and Spanish versions of the previously released Waka Waka were included. Shakira collaborates with El Cata on "Loca", with Pitbull on "Rabiosa" and with Residente on "Gordita". Residente raps about "liking Shakira better when she was chubbier, had dark hair and was a rockera".
Sale el Sol opens with a melodic rock "Sale el Sol" song written by Shakira and L. F. Ochoa. The ballad "Antes de las Seis" Shakira composed with Lester Mendez. Merengue pop "Addicted to You", despite its title, is sung mostly in Spanish. The sorrowful ballad "Lo Que Más" is the work of Shakira and Albert Menéndez. "Islands" is her cover of the song of the same name by the xx.
With the Shakira (2014) album, Shakira retreats, for the most part, into the mainstream pop/rock/adult contemporary/country music range. Before its release, she introduced the album as follows: "I am enough. Imperfections and all. So what I am offering you now is just that. Shakira. Nothing more. A little bit of rock, a little bit of folk, a little reggae and naturally some dance—but as always, and above all, a lot of heart". The best-known songs on the record are the ballad Empire, reggae rock "Can't Remember to Forget You" featuring Rihanna (or sung by Shakira alone as "Nunca Me Acuerdo de Olvidarte"), and "Dare (La La La)", a version of which was a theme song for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. "Chasing Shadows" has been called "a sublime electro-pop moment". The country pop song "Medicine" features Blake Shelton.


==== El Dorado ====
El Dorado (2017), named after the City of Gold envisioned by the Muisca people of Colombia, "shines with resounding versatility and cultural pride" and provides the listener with "a rich musical treasure trove". Among the album's hits are the reggaeton "Chantaje" with Maluma and vallenato "La Bicicleta" with Carlos Vives. Shakira utilizes the styles of música urbana. "Me Enamoré" refers to Shakira's love for Gerard Piqué back then and it starkly contrasts with the narrative of her next album, Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran. In "Toneladas", a ballad written with Luis Fernando Ochoa, Shakira "highlights her emotive prowess" being happy with "toneladas masivas de amor" ('massive tons of love'). "Deja Vu", "a sensual bachata fusion", features Prince Royce. According to the Billboard reviewers, however, the message of the song "When a Woman" contrasts with the empowering essence of Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran sharply and in an unsettling way.
There are many melodic items in this set. The ballad "Nada" was composed by Shakira and L.F. Ochoa. "Amarillo" was also written by them. The reggaeton "Perro Fiel" features Nicky Jam. Shakira sings "Trap" with Maluma. The stylistically unique, nostalgic "Comme moi" is given in two versions. Black M sings and raps in French in one (this one comes with a video), and Magic! in English in the other.


==== Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran ====

Being "dragged down" by her partner Gerard Piqué, as Shakira told it, it took her seven years before her next album, Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran (March 2024), was released. Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran, a rich collection of 16 songs, was born out of their breakup and associated Shakira's emotions. "In a stunning transformation", the artist turned her pain into musical gold, one of her most acclaimed creations. She utilized a variety of moods and genres, including Afrobeats in "Nassau, "soul-stirring" bachata in "Monotonía", or Tex-Mex rhythms in "(Entre Paréntesis)". "Cómo Dónde y Cuándo" is "a stellar revival" of Shakira's rock roots.
Describing herself as being in a survival and reflection stage, Shakira "celebrates the strength of womanhood". As she continues "to craft melodies and lyrics that evoke pain, passion and allure", she sings by herself in such tracks as "Tiempo Sin Verte" and "Última", or collaborates with Cardi B, Karol G, Ozuna, Grupo Frontera, or Rauw Alejandro. With Argentine DJ Bizarrap she first produced "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", the "wildly unapologetic kiss-off" to her ex and an iconic "female empowerment anthem". Las Mujeres features two versions of "Vol. 53". The song's video shows Shakira and Bizarrap performing in the studio. At Times Square, the Tiësto remix was used with her singing and dancing.
In the opening electropop "Puntería", Shakira sings, Cardi B sings and raps, and the action in the video takes place in a mythological setting. "La Fuerte" is another electropop piece done with Bizarrap. The pop rock "Tiempo Sin Verte" is a "punchy alternative track fused with subtle dance melodies", in which Shakira "chants in her potent rockera vocals". "Cohete", a brilliant, pulsating dance-pop pearl with "a futuristic allure", she sings with Rauw Alejandro. The piano ballad "Última" was the last song that Shakira insisted on adding to the album. She wanted to tell "about coming to terms with the end of her relationship and leaving the past behind". The video for the track was done on a cold day in New York City subway system. "Te Felicito" was the first single released by Shakira for her planned album. Another collaboration with Rauw Alejandro, this reggaeton electropop song "sets the tone for Shakira's no-holds-barred attitude" with respect to her Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran lyrics. The reggaeton hit "TQG" and the video Shakira recorded with Karol G; its "fierce and unapologetic" lyrics were motivated by their comparable personal experiences. The "Acróstico" ballad is "a heartfelt, yet poignant open letter from Shakira to her two children". Milan and Sasha sing and play the piano alongside their mother. "Copa Vacía", another reggaeton track sung with Manuel Turizo, is known for its Shakira-mermaid video. "El Jefe" and its video were recorded with regional Mexican band Fuerza Regida. According to Shakira, "it's about abuse of power".
Boutayna Chokrane wrote that Shakira's Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran is "a brutally honest look at her breakup" in which the singer "signals a deliberate and timely return to her roots". But "at its core", it is "a pop album for a mainstream audience"; the artist "takes big swings and extends her dominance".
In September 2024, Shakira released the lively, Afrobeats-influenced "Soltera" song. Focused at this point on her sons and career, she extols the virtues and pleasures of living without a male partner. The song was followed in October with its video, which "is all about a carefree night out with friends", mostly Shakira's fellow female celebrities. In May 2025, "Soltera" brought Shakira the Favorite Latin Song award by the American Music Awards, which made her the most-awarded female Latin artist in the award show's history.


=== Dance and stage appearance ===
Next to performing music, Shakira is dedicated to dancing. She credited her belly dance-derived dancing with helping her overcome shyness. Her distinctive style is said to combine Latin dancing with Middle Eastern belly dance, which she was exposed to because of her Lebanese heritage. As Shakira said, "because my father is of 100 percent Lebanese descent, I am devoted to Arabic tastes and sounds". She told MTV that she learned how to belly dance by trying to flip a coin with her belly. Her hip shaking is mentioned, for example, in Fifth Harmony's "Brave Honest Beautiful" song, where the girl group members claim they can "dance like Beyoncé" and "shake like Shakira".
In her earlier live performances, Shakira was noted for usually employing minimal production, taking to the stage with little makeup and, until and including the El Dorado World Tour, without or with few background dancers. She preferred to focus on her vocals, dance moves, and stage presence. In 2006 she confessed, however, to "getting lost in a cloud of hairdressers, make-up artists and assistants" for years, but declared then "reclaiming her image" and doing her own make-up.
Shakira had repeatedly spoken of being a "control freak", wanting to do and be involved with "everything" on "her ship" by herself. "So I get involved in every part of my career. I'm in total control. Sometimes I feel like my mind is going to explode, but I can't change it. I've tried to delegate, but believe me, it doesn't work". On being a perfectionist, she said, "I'm not as confident as people think". [...] "I still have that monster inside of me that wants to do everything better and right".
The stage has been the one and only place of public exposure where Shakira feels uninhibited. She greatly enjoys performing before large gatherings, but feels uncomfortable when the number of spectators is small. "The stage and crowd and lights and applause of the people dress me. Once you take that away and you're there with your voice—it's such a private, intimate act, the one of singing and exposing your soul." Shakira easily and naturally connects and bonds with stadiums full of fans and demonstrates in such settings "boundless self-confidence".
Beginning in her twenties, Shakira dyed her black hair blond (first) and often performed barefoot (later). For her light-dyed hair (on account of which she has been called a "sellout"), she gave an interviewer the following explanation: "But it wasn't a calculated move. It wasn't like, Oh, I want to reach the American audience—let me be blonde and let me get a pair of blue contact lenses and bleach my skin. I didn't want to be white. I just thought my curls looked cool with a blonde, beachy style". Between Shakira's MTV Unplugged (1999) and Roseland Ballroom (2001) Manhattan shows, her stage appearance and style changed dramatically. "Her previous look was just as pretty, but the new one is tougher and wilder", noted in December 2001 Frank Kogan of The Village Voice. To Ted Kessler of The Observer (2002), Shakira "did look like a Latino Britney", with her "all bleached blonde curls" and a "tiny 5ft frame", "but as soon as she opened her mouth, she slipped into gear and motored powerfully past Britney's breathy bump'n'grind".


=== Songwriting ===
Music industry executive and artist manager Merck Mercuriadis praised Shakira's songwriting footprint, saying "what no one should ever take for granted is that she is one of the most serious and successful songwriters of the last 25 years, having written or co-written virtually every song she has ever recorded". Isabelia Herrera, a music editor, critic and curator, wrote of Shakira's "fascinating, idiosyncratic songwriting". Shakira has written several hundred songs, of which at least several dozen have become widely-known hits.


=== Singing ===
Shakira is a contralto and is known for her "unique and mesmerizing" singing voice, which includes her "trademark" yodeling. Ted Kessler described her as having "the range of an operatic diva". "She's a rock girl through and through. Her singing is full-throated and urgent, her manner commanding onstage or on record" – wrote in 2002 Evan Wright of the Rolling Stone magazine. Alexandra Zacharella wrote for the UT Tyler's College of Music Society that "Shakira's vocal stylings have been compared to Spanish yodeling and it is her very Arabic roots that shape her vocal inflections and the use of double harmonic scales and the Major Locrian scale in her compositions".


=== Instruments ===
Professional guitar technician Drew Foppe, who has worked with Shakira on several of her tours, spoke on her instrument playing and competence: "She can play the guitar just fine. She plays both acoustic and electric guitars on stage. There really isn't anything that happens on stage that she isn't in complete control over, from the tones, arrangements, and the overall look of everything. It's her baby, so to speak. She isn't really a gear nerd. However, she knows exactly what she wants things to sound like from every single instrument on stage. [...]  The aesthetics of how a piece of gear looks is just as important as how it sounds with Shakira."
In her pre-Laundry Service rock performances, Shakira also played harmonica extensively.


== Legacy ==

Shakira is a prominent figure in Latin and world music. Steve Huey of AllMusic described her (22 November 2009) as a "wildly inventive diva who created a cross-cultural pop sound rooted in her native Colombia but encompassing nearly every territory in the world. [...] Noted for her aggressive, rock-influenced approach, Shakira maintained an extraordinary degree of creative control over her music, especially for a female artist; she wrote or co-wrote nearly all of her own material, and in the process gained a reputation as one of Latin music's most ambitiously poetic lyricists. When she released her first English material in late 2001, she became an instant pop sensation, thanks to her quirky poetic sense and a sexy video image built on her hip-shaking belly dance moves."
Fiona Sturges of The Independent named Shakira an "international phenomenon". "At the MTV Europe Awards in November" (2005), she wrote, (Shakira) "was the winner of the Best Female award, seeing off rivals Gwen Stefani, Alicia Keys, Missy Elliott and Mariah Carey". "With her Lebanese ancestry and English-language songs — with her huge bilingual hit 'Hips Don't Lie', done with the Haitian-American singer Wyclef Jean, for example — Shakira showed how universal a Latin artist could be. At the same time, in a difficult balance, she has tried to stay Latin American", wrote in 2009 in The New York Times Magazine Scott Malcomson. In 2018, The New York Times called her "a titan of Latin Pop", adding that "even as a new generation of Spanish-speaking artists are crossing over into American music's mainstream, Shakira's output stands alone". As the newspaper noted, "the seemingly ageless singer-songwriter" had produced, over almost three decades, rock, pop, and reggaeton.
Shakira's global success differs from that achieved by other famous Latino singers such as Jennifer Lopez, Gloria Estefan or Enrique Iglesias, because it has been accomplished by a star who grew up in South America, the first one of this type to crossover globally. "It was difficult for Anglo critics to decipher the differences between Latin Americans and U.S.-born Latinos, who grew up speaking and writing in English." Shakira's unprecedented expansion has inspired other Latin American artists to attempt crossing over into the U.S. music market. One example is Mexican pop star Paulina Rubio, of whom MTV wrote "there's no question that Shakira opened doors in this country for artists like Rubio to succeed". According to Spin, Shakira has paved the way for such Latin artists as Maluma and J Balvin to crossover. Lucas Villa summarized in the Paper magazine (2020): "In her wake, Colombia has become a hotspot for talent with recent exports like J Balvin, Maluma and Karol G. As Latin music continues to become a global force, we can't forget to remember Shakira's impact in the movement."
In September 2017, Time magazine referred to Shakira as a "pop legend". In December 2020, Entertainment Tonight perceived Shakira as "one of the most influential artists of the 21st century". Shakira has been called "the crossover queen" by The Economist, "the queen of the World Cup" by Billboard, and "Latin America's pop queen" by Pitchfork. Billboard has noted that Shakira's music videos have "redefined the role of dancing in music videos", while seeing her as the best Latin female music video artist of all time.
The authors of the book Reggaeton, published by Duke University Press, credited Shakira with popularizing the reggaeton genre in North America, Europe and Asia. The Public Broadcasting Service, after the release of Shakira's album Shakira, had written: "Gloria Estefan, Ricky Martin and Shakira are the most successful artists of the so-called Golden Age of Latin Music which reshaped America's cultural landscape for the twenty-first century". Alongside her impact on Latin and mainstream popular culture, Shakira has also influenced popular culture in the Arab world. In a publication titled Popular Culture in the Arab World: Arts, Politics, and the Media, author Andrew Hammond wrote: "Inspired by the success of Colombian singer Shakira, who is hugely popular in the Arab world where her Lebanese origin is a source of pride, singers like Lebanon's Nawal El Zoghbi and Morocco's Samira Said have shifted their image and sound in an attempt to follow in her footsteps". On the other hand, the newspaper El Correo del Golfo wrote that Shakira was the greatest exponent of Middle Eastern music in the West, citing her interest in Arabic music and dance.
In 1999, Shakira's MTV Unplugged concert was the first time an "unplugged" episode was broadcast entirely in Spanish. It became her major breakthrough in the U.S. music market. A Latin performance and a Latina solo act were unprecedented in the series. In 2001, "Whenever, Wherever" music video was aired on MTV with both the English and Spanish versions. According to a spokesman for the channel, for the first time U.S. MTV had aired a Spanish-language video. "La Tortura" was the first full Spanish-language music video to air on MTV without an English version. In 2005, Sanz and Shakira performed "La Tortura" at the MTV Video Music Awards (the first Spanish-language song featured there). In 2018, "Hips Don't Lie" was selected as one of the greatest songs by 21st century female artists by National Public Radio, ranked at number 65. "Crossover artists often sacrifice something about their musical identities to appease a U.S. listenership. Shakira's biggest single, 'Hips Don't Lie', did the opposite. Though never marketed as reggaeton, it's the most popular song in the genre's history", wrote NPR. "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)" was called by Billboard "the most successful World Cup anthem ever" (2018). "The song became a global hit that transcended the time of the mundial", wrote Billboard in 2013.
Published by the U.S. Bureau of International Information Programs, the journal Global Issues (2006) cited Shakira as one of the celebrities "in today's globalized world" who "made it big by sharing the uniqueness of their talent and culture with the global community". The Paper magazine wrote in 2020 about Shakira's longevity and her, a pre-digital era artist, ability to successfully crack the digital-streaming era of music: "The self-proclaimed 'She Wolf' is a titan in the digital era of music where she devours billions of streams with her catalog". In 2010, Google revealed that Shakira was the most searched female entertainer of the year. In 2020, she was the most Googled musician / band of the year and the 7th most searched person.
Many artists have cited Shakira as an influence, expressed their admiration for her as a person and an artist, or desire to work with her on joint music projects. The list includes Rihanna, Taylor Swift, Selena Gomez, Katy Perry, Christina Aguilera, Justin Bieber, Maluma, Ozuna, Ed Sheeran, Anitta, Cardi B, and Beyoncé, among others.
Intellectuals and writers have admired Shakira. Colombian Nobel Prize winning novelist Gabriel García Márquez wrote in 1999 "no one of any age can sing or dance with the innocent sensuality Shakira seems to have invented". Márquez published an essay exalting her "phenomenal musical talent", "extraordinary maturity", and "will of granite". Having met Márquez, Shakira was also pleased: "We got along very well. I think there was some kind of link intellectually. [...] He's somebody that means a lot to my people, and to a certain extent, I think I do too. So it was like an encounter of two people who are trying to put the name of my country in a good visible place." Márquez and Shakira had become friends.
Shakira's influence has transcended the boundaries of pop culture; she has become a socio-political influencer and was named as one of the "World's Greatest Leaders" of 2017 by Fortune. According to the magazine, "the multilingual singer was a force of nature in the philanthropic world" and "Her 104 million fans on Facebook make her the most-followed female celebrity on the planet. But her real leadership comes in how she has leveraged those (social media) platforms on behalf of vulnerable kids".
The Guardian published in November 2009 an essay by Euan Ferguson titled "The making of Saint Shakira". Among its topics are Shakira's impact on Colombia's social change, especially in the area of childhood education, and her ability to effectively discuss issues with such world leaders as Barack Obama and Gordon Brown ("she gets things done"). On the popular level, she is celebrated "as something of a saint" and "accorded near-divine status" in Colombia and elsewhere in Latin America. Ferguson found Shakira quite authentic and convincing intellectually. He wrote: "Something very strange happens, in the company of Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll, to cynicism. [...] Not arrogant or demanding [...] she not only knows what she's talking about, but puts her money where her mouth is [...] she's Madonna gone right".
For The Independent (a November 2010 article), Shakira is a "living proof that pop and politics can mix". The newspaper wonders how she "balances battling poverty with squeezing into sequinned bikinis", but notes that because of her stature and through her efforts she is able to have "the ear of the global political elite". In one instance, as witnessed by the paper's Craig McLean at the Clinton Global Initiative annual meeting, Shakira, "a confidante of both Colombian and American presidents", appeared as comfortable mingling with political heavyweights as she was the night before, when she performed a sold-out concert at Madison Square Garden. McLean commended her accented but very fluent English and observed, referring to the 2009 "She Wolf" video and its publicity, that she "is clearly happier, more confident, geo-politicking than talking about her own sexual politics". Shakira is, he concluded, "as sagacious as she is glam".
Shakira speaks Spanish, Portuguese, English, Italian, French, and Catalan.
Announcing its partnership with Shakira, "the world's iconic artist", the Despegar company wrote in June 2024: "Shakira has challenged the boundaries of art and music, establishing herself as one of the most influential and beloved artists of all time".


=== Monuments ===

In 2006, a six-tonne (6.6-short-ton), 5-metre-tall (16 ft) statue of Shakira was installed in her hometown Barranquilla in a park near Estadio Metropolitano Roberto Meléndez.
In July 2018, Shakira visited Tannourine in Lebanon, the village of her paternal great-grandmother and father. Accompanied by officials, she went to the Tannourine Cedar Reserve, where two trees were dedicated to her and a square in the forest was named after her.
In December 2023, Shakira's hometown of Barranquilla honored the singer with a 21-foot bronze statue in a park along the banks of the Magdalena River. The sculpture shows the curly-haired singer belly dancing with her arms overhead, in a sheer skirt with shiny aluminum decoration.


== Achievements ==

Shakira has received numerous awards and recognition for her work. She is the recipient of four Grammy Awards and fifteen Latin Grammy Awards—the second most for a female artist. With over 95 million records sold worldwide before the launching of the 2024 Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran album, Shakira is one of the world's best-selling musicians. By 2023, with over 20 billion cumulative views, she was one of the top-10 artists overall of all time on YouTube. By the time she released Laundry Service in 2001, she had already sold 10 million albums in Latin America, according to Billboard. Three of her albums are among the best-selling Latin albums in the United States: Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 (8th), Dónde Están los Ladrones? (9th) and Pies Descalzos (23rd); she is the female artist with the highest number of best-selling Latin albums in the country. Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 had become the best-selling Latin pop album and the second best-selling Latin album overall of the 2000s decade in the U.S. Dónde Están los Ladrones? has also been one of the best-selling albums in Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Mexico. Pies Descalzos has been among the best-selling albums in Brazil and Colombia.
According to Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems, "Hips Don't Lie" was the most-played pop song in a single week in American radio history, being played 9,657 times in one week. The song made Shakira the first artist in the history of Billboard charts to reach number-one spots on both the Mainstream Top 40 and the Hot Latin Songs chart in the same week (27 June 2006). She became the only artist from South America with number-one spots on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, the Australian ARIA Charts, and the UK singles chart. Shakira is the female artist with most top-ten hits on the Billboard's Hot Latin Songs chart (37). Her song "La Tortura" at one time held the chart's record for most weeks at number one, with the total of 25 non-consecutive weeks. She has also had most number-one songs on the Latin Digital Song Sales chart (18) and is the female artist with most number-one hits on the Latin Airplay chart (24).
In 2008, Shakira was named honorary chairperson of the Global Campaign for Education. In February 2011, at its Cultural Rhythms festival, the Harvard Foundation named Shakira Artist of the Year, awarding her its most prestigious medal. The foundation's director praised the nominee: "Her contributions to music and distinguished history of creativity have been applauded by people throughout the world, and she is greatly admired worldwide for her humanitarian efforts". The Harvard Gazette wrote of "Shakira's commitment to education and to the needs of those suffering around the world [...] advanced through her humanitarian work".
Nokia stated in 2010 that there were more Shakira music downloads in the prior year than of any other Latin artist; "She Wolf" was the top download. In December 2010, she was ranked number five on Billboard's "Online Video's Most Viral Artists of 2010" list, with 404,118,932 views. In November 2011, the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce honored Shakira with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, in the Category of Recording. The announcement summarized her achievements as an artist and advocate for social causes, including her October 2011 nomination to the White House Education Commission. Also in November Shakira was declared, at the Latin Grammys, the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year. In January 2012, she received the honor of Chevalier De L'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres from French minister of culture. The medal recognizes significant contributions to the arts and literature.
In 2014, Shakira became the first musical act to perform three times at the FIFA World Cup. Aleiodes shakirae, a newly-described species of parasitic wasp, was named after her because it causes its host (a caterpillar) to "shake and wiggle". Forbes ranked Shakira on its list of the "World's 100 Most Powerful Women" at number 40 in 2012, 52 in 2013, and 58 in 2014. In 2015, Time recognized Shakira as one of the most influential people on social media. Shakira and Argentine president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner were the only Latin influencers on Time's list. The magazine mentioned Shakira's "social capital", her having more Facebook fans than anybody else, and her "unparalleled platform" on social media, where she effectively promoted her work and philanthropy.
In 2018, Spotify listed Shakira as number 10 most-streamed female artist of the decade of the platform's existence; she had been the highest streamed Latin artist. In 2020, Shakira became the first female artist with four songs from different decades to have over 100 million streams on Spotify. She was the only artist with Spanish songs, the only Latin artist, and third overall, after Michael Jackson and Eminem, to achieve this milestone. In the same year, she broke the Vevo Certified Awards record, becoming the artist with the most videos with over 100 million views. In 2019, Houston Press listed Shakira, whose "debut album was released nearly 30 years" before, as one of the women who should have been introduced into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 2022, her financial worth was estimated at $300 million.
In 2022, MTV (Latin America) included Shakira in the list of "the most influential women in the history of music", as the only Latina on the list. In May 2023, Billboard honored Shakira as the "Latin Woman of the Year", the first time the magazine bestowed this distinction. Billboard highlighted Shakira's record-breaking achievements of 2022 and 2023 and noted that she had been one of the best-selling musicians of all time. "With grace, a deep tradition of giving back, and enormous talent" [...] she "continues to be more relevant than ever", asserted the magazine. According to Ronald Day of Telemundo, Shakira has "empowered generations to embrace our (Latin) identity through music". She was ranked at number 45 on Billboard's 2025 "Top 100 Women Artists of the 21st Century" list.


== Philanthropy, humanitarian work and politics ==

In 1997, Shakira founded Fundación Pies Descalzos (the Barefoot Foundation), a Colombian charity. Funded by Shakira and other international groups and individuals, the foundation builds and maintains special schools for underprivileged children in Colombia. The name of the foundation was taken from her third studio album, Pies Descalzos, released in 1995. The foundation is focused on aid through education; its schools across Colombia provide teaching and meals for children. On 3 April 2006, Shakira was honored at a United Nations ceremony for establishing the Pies Descalzos Foundation. Accepting the award, the singer said: "Let's not forget at the end of this day when we all go home, 960 children will have died in Latin America". Besides serving many thousand children, the foundation provides support and training for their parents and communities. Shakira personally supervises the operation, visits the schools, interacts with the children and other people involved.
In December 2006, Shakira became a founding member of Latin America in Solidarity Action (ALAS) Foundation, a coalition of artists and business leaders seeking to promote integrated early childhood public policies in Latin America and the Caribbean. She spoke of "a grand alliance, between the public sector and civil society, to protect the most fragile people in our population, the children". ALAS has organized huge concert events and worked with top politicians. At the 2007 Clinton Global Initiative, Shakira secured a commitment of $40 million from the government of Spain for victims of natural disasters. In 2008, she served as honorary chair of the Global Campaign for Education. In the December 2008 / January 2009 issue, People en Español declared Shakira the Humanitarian of the Year (a part of its Las Estrellas del Año awards). In 2010, she collaborated with the World Bank and the Barefoot Foundation to establish an initiative to distribute educational and developmental programs for children across Latin America.
Shakira is a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and one of the global representatives of the UN children's agency. In March 2010, she was awarded a medal by the UN International Labour Organization in recognition of being, as UN Labour Chief Juan Somavía put it, a "true ambassador for children and young people, for quality education and social justice [...] we are pleased to honor what you are doing". "We must act now. Together, we can make education and decent work for all a reality", Shakira told the hundreds of guests gathered at the ceremony in Geneva. In November 2010, after performing as the opening act of the MTV European Music Awards, the Colombian singer received the MTV Free Your Mind award for her continuing efforts to facilitate access to education for all children around the world.
In the Spanish edition of the magazine GQ (October 2010), Shakira directed the words "we are all gypsies" to French President Nicolas Sarkozy. In the interview, she declared: "What is happening now to them (the gypsies) will happen to our children and our children's children. We must turn to our citizens to act for the fundamental rights of human beings and condemn all that seems to us indictable".
In February 2011, the FC Barcelona Foundation and Pies Descalzos reached an agreement on children's education through sport. Shakira was the youngest artist ever honored at the Latin Grammy Awards as the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year. At a tribute dinner and concert on 9 November 2011 in Las Vegas, she received the recognition for her artistic and philanthropic contributions. The Latin Academy president spoke of being "honored to pay homage to this dynamic, socially conscious woman". In October 2011, she was appointed by President Barack Obama to the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanics. In 2011, the Obama administration was fully engaged in the implementation of policies and carrying out of procedures that led to mass deportations of Latino people from the United States, including parents of U.S. citizen school children. On 26 April 2014, Shakira was honored with the Hero Award at the Radio Disney Music Awards for her work with the Pies Descalzos Foundation and a number of other charitable organizations.

In July 2017, Shakira sang with Chris Martin at the Global Citizen Festival in Hamburg. The aims of the periodic event were to secure funding commitments and other support for action on key issues, such as access to education, food security, and women's rights worldwide. According to Global Citizen (2025), Shakira "continues to be a powerful voice in the movement to Defeat Poverty and Defend the Planet". She was among the personalities who joined the FIFA Global Citizen Education Fund's Advisory Board in October 2025. The fund was a result of Global Citizen's partnership with FIFA in anticipation of the 2026 FIFA World Cup. 
On 2 November 2018, during a visit to her birthplace Barranquilla concerning the construction of a school through her foundation, Shakira spoke about the educational policies of government of President Iván Duque of Colombia. She argued against the government's intentions to reduce the national education budget from 13% to 7%, saying, "This is unacceptable. It shows that instead of progressing forward we are moving backward. We need to invest more in education and we need to build more schools in places where there are none." She also talked about social inequality and the resulting absence of schooling for many children.
In April 2020, the World Literacy Foundation announced Shakira as the recipient of the 2020 Global Literacy Award for "her significant contribution to the improvement of literacy for disadvantaged children around the world". "While her success in the music and performance industry has taken the world by storm, her support for children's literacy and education has only improved and gained traction over the years", in the world where illiteracy is an acute global crisis, stressed the foundation. In May 2020, Shakira donated more than 50,000 face masks and ten respirators to combat the COVID-19 pandemic in her hometown of Barranquilla. In October 2020, she was appointed by Prince William, Duke of Cambridge a member of the Earthshot Prize Council, to decide on prizes ("environment Nobel") for five environmental pioneers per year, individuals or organizations, providing them with funds needed to further their work on problems impacting the environment. During the 2021 Colombian protests, Shakira condemned the violence and demanded from President Iván Duque to "immediately stop the human rights violations" and "restitute the value of human life above any political interest".
Shakira's wrote an op-ed commentary for Time magazine, published on 30 October 2020 under the title "Shakira: The Parents of 545 Children Are Missing, and the Silence Is Blaring". Her immediate concern was the fate of 545 children separated at the U.S.–Mexico border from their parents, whose whereabouts were unknown. She strongly criticized the U.S. border control and immigration practices: "How [...] could a nation built on the shoulders of immigrants [...] have such unimaginably cruel immigration policies?". "This is not about politics", she asserted, but "the people responsible for this cruel policy ("the harm caused to these innocent children") must be held accountable". She noted that "speaking up isn't always easy, especially when one is not an American citizen and can be perceived as an outsider commenting on domestic policies". She introduced herself as "the daughter of a New Yorker", referring to the place of birth of her father.
On International Women's Day, 8 March 2021, Global Citizen wrote about "14 feminist heroes one should know and celebrate". Shakira was listed alongside a diverse group of well-known female personalities that included Beyoncé, Jane Fonda, Hillary Clinton, Winnie Mandela, and Dolly Parton.
On 2 February 2025, Shakira's 48th birthday, at the 67th Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles, she received the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album for Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran. She dedicated the award on stage to her "brothers and sisters", immigrants in the United States: " I want to dedicate this award to all my immigrant brothers and sisters in this country", she said. "You're loved, worth it and I will always fight with you. And to all of those women who work really hard every day to provide for their families, you are the real she wolves. So this is for you, too".
At the onset of her U.S. tour (May 2025), Shakira wanted to proudly celebrate the Latino community, taking notice of the politically fraught era. "This moment together is a celebration of who we are, how far we've come", she told the Rolling Stone magazine. "I want the show to be representative of who we are as a community, especially during these hard times." She saw this representation and fighting prejudice as her standing mandate throughout her career. Shakira had been reported to have been worried about the safety and well-being of her children and herself as immigrants in the U.S. Her June 2025 show in the Los Angeles area was postponed to August because of the immigration policy and enforcement-related civil unrest in the vicinity in June.


== Other undertakings ==
Shakira has engaged in different businesses and pursuits. She acted in the Colombian telenovela El Oasis in 1994, playing the character of Luisa Maria.
Shakira and the fragrance company Puig launched S by Shakira, her first beauty product and the first of Shakira Perfumes line, in 2010. Among the first perfumes released were S by Shakira and S by Shakira Eau Florale, along with lotions and body sprays. As of 2019, 30 fragrances had been released, not counting deluxe editions. On 17 September 2015, Shakira was featured as a playable bird in the game Angry Birds POP! for a limited time, and then in a special tournament in the game Angry Birds Friends. On 15 October 2015, Love Rocks Starring Shakira, a video game that featured her, was launched.
On 14 August 2015, at Disney's D23 Expo, it was announced that Shakira would play a character in the Disney animated movie Zootopia. She would give voice to Gazelle, the biggest pop star in Zootopia. Shakira also recorded a song for the film, titled "Try Everything", written and composed by Sia and Stargate and released in January 2016. The movie, premiered in February 2016, brought a record-breaking box office success in several countries and earned a worldwide gross of over $1 billion, making it the fourth highest-grossing film of 2016 and the 43rd highest-grossing film of all time. On 8 November 2024, Shakira announced that she would return as Gazelle for Zootopia 2; she was going to reprise her voice role and compose a new song for the film. The song, titled "Zoo", written by Shakira, Ed Sheeran and Blake Slatkin, became available on 10 October 2025 and the film premiered in November 2025. Her sons provided voices for little bunnies in Zootopia 2.
On 21 September 2021, Shakira released the La Caldera NFT collection, which features four audiovisual pieces. The proceeds from the collection supported Shakira's Pies Descalzos Foundation. In December 2021, she was announced to be an executive producer for Dancing with Myself, an NBC dance competition series. The program aired in 2022.
In October 2023, Epson announced a partnership with the "global icon Shakira [...] a cultural influencer and change trailblazer". She became the company's brand ambassador for Epson Latin America. According to Keith Kratzberg, president and CEO at Epson America, "Shakira is an icon of creativity with unsurpassed passion for the people of Latin America". Epson stressed "the Colombian singer and songwriter's commitment to improving access to education for children in underprivileged communities". The partnership was envisaged to be a multi-year effort "across several communication channels and social media".
To uplift women through the power of music and "empower her sisters this International Women's Day (8 March) and beyond", Shakira joined forces with Hard Rock International and they announced together on 27 February 2025 a year-long partnership. She also spoke of "breaking barriers and making the world a more inclusive space where every woman feels confident being themselves". The Hard Rock Heals Foundation declared donating $250,000 to Pies Descalzos Foundation.
In June 2025, Shakira announced the launching of her new hair-care beauty line, Isima. Changing hairstyles and colors have been prominent in the singer's performances and Isima was "designed with the diversity and specificity of Latina hair in mind". Shakira was actively promoting her first venture into the hair-care area on her social media platforms.
As of 1 July 2025, Epson announced a new partnership with the "international music icon" Shakira, who became the brand's official ambassador for the META-CWA region (Middle East, Turkey, Africa, Central and West Asia). The partnership with Shakira was to be a part of the company's Imagine New Possibilities campaign.


== Personal life ==
In December 2024, Puerto Rican actor Osvaldo Ríos spoke of his past relationship with Shakira, which started when she was 20 and he was 36 and lasted nearly a year. He told of an "emotional and spiritual connection" between them and said that Shakira was very devoted to the Virgin Mary. They traveled together, often accompanied, "due to her family's traditional Lebanese roots", by Shakira's brother Tonino. Among the places they visited were Paris, Brazil and Puerto Rico. Although they wanted to get married, their respective careers eventually pulled them apart, as Ríos realized that "this bird had to fly very high" and encouraged Shakira to pursue her professional path without limitations. He named "Moscas en la Casa", "No Creo" and "Tú" as songs inspired by their romantic bond and by their love letters in particular.
Shakira began a relationship with Argentine lawyer Antonio de la Rúa in 2000. Antonio is a son of Fernando de la Rúa, who was president of Argentina from 1999 to 2001. In a 2009 interview, Shakira said, "The fact is, I'm not very traditionalist. We live together as husband and wife, we don't need anything to make it official. [...] Why fix things that aren't broken?". They had been "engaged" from 2001, but the marriage had never materialized. Shakira kept saying, almost until the end, that she desired and expected a permanent union and family with de la Rúa. For a number of years, de la Rúa had managed Shakira's business and career.
On 10 January 2011, a statement bearing the names "Shakira and Antonio" in the signature field was published on shakira.com. "Since August 2010, we made a mutual decision to take time apart from our romantic relationship [...] we view this period of separation as temporary [...] as we continue to be partners in our business and professional lives [...] Antonio continues to oversee and conduct my business and career interests as he has always done", she wrote. De la Rúa's civil litigation against Shakira was first reported in September 2012. He filed a suit against her in California in April 2013, asking for $100 million he claimed he was owed after she terminated her business partnership with him and his services in October 2011. His lawsuit was dismissed by a Los Angeles County Superior Court judge in August 2013. Two other lawsuits that de la Rúa filed against his former partner were also unsuccessful. Shakira also sued and a legal settlement of some sort may have been reached.
Shakira's relationship with Antonio de la Rúa contributed to the existence of "Underneath Your Clothes", "Whenever, Wherever", and on its breakup, "Lo Que Más".
Shakira and Spanish football player Gerard Piqué, who is exactly ten years her junior, first met in June 2010 when shooting the music video for Shakira's song "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)", the official song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. A relationship ensued, for some time not revealed, and the couple took residence in Barcelona. Shakira gave birth to their first son, Milan, on 22 January 2013. She gave birth to their second son, Sasha, on 29 January 2015. According to Shakira, she learned about Piqué's "betrayal" of her (an affair with another woman) from media accounts. It happened at a difficult time for her, when her then 91-year old father was undergoing hospitalization following a bad fall he had suffered. 12 years after they met, in June 2022, Shakira and Piqué announced in a joint statement that they were separating.
In 2009, Scott Malcomson wrote in The New York Times Magazine article that Shakira's life was "relentless and unlikely". Her "normal manner is intense and preoccupied, with interruptions of bright enthusiasm". Her work ethics he called "somewhat extreme". With fans, whose loyalty she seeks, "she is all attentive patience". Malcomson commented on the subject of Shakira's "feminine allure", the factor that was "at once limiting and critical to her power". He mentioned the economist Jeffrey Sachs bringing the matter up in a speech at Columbia University. Malcomson listed some of the ways in which Shakira had dealt with and reacted to the issue of her attractiveness, in real life and in artistic creations: pleasant carelessness, rage and hunger, sheer athletic joy, easygoing self-confident lust, physical insecurity (the weight control pressure), and "an acute sense of the physical and mental pain of attraction".
Shakira expressed her thoughts on the reasons why she had worked so hard and for so many years on her professional development and career, what had been her "motivation to continue". In 2009 she told the interviewer about wanting, in her early years, to bring her parents joy, "to fill the void in their own lives" (because of the hard times the family had gone through). "Then, later, I wanted to make my own people proud, my home town, my country, this country that has gone through so many difficulties." She wanted to "make a difference". Eventually, she came to realize that she herself also mattered and her motivations did not have to be all external. "And now it's all for me", she said, "I guess that's why I'm still working, because this time I get to do it for me!"
In 2009, Shakira reflected on her life: "Being in the public eye since such a young age, I don't know any other way of living — it's everything I know. My family and my friends remind me what's real, which helps".
Between 2007 and 2009, Shakira studied the history of Western Civilization at UCLA. In 2020, she announced her completion of an ancient philosophy course through the University of Pennsylvania, describing it as an impractical hobby of hers.


=== Tax controversy ===
In November 2017, Shakira was named in the Paradise Papers. It was disclosed that she was the sole shareholder of a Malta-based company used to transfer more than $30 million in music rights. Her legal representatives maintained that her use of the company was entirely lawful.
In 2017, an investigation into Shakira's taxes was announced by the Spanish authorities. The prosecutors alleged that she failed to pay taxes in Spain between 2012 and 2014, a period during which she resided in Barcelona with Gerard Piqué. Shakira contended that her primary residence remained in the Bahamas during that time, that she was also engaged in international touring and was not legally a resident of Spain because of not having lived there for more than six months per year. In July 2021, a Spanish judge determined that there was "evidence of criminality" sufficient to bring her to trial on charges of tax fraud.
In 2021, the Pandora Papers revealed that Shakira submitted applications for three offshore companies in 2019. Her representatives told LaSexta that these applications were not intended to establish new companies but were part of the process of dissolving existing ones. They asserted that the companies had no income or activities and that Spanish authorities had been informed of their existence. Most of the artist's income had been generated outside of Spain.
Negotiations with the Spanish Prosecution Ministry took place, but in July 2022 Shakira refused the settlement offered (its terms were not disclosed), opting to go to trial to prove her innocence. Prosecutors requested an eight-year prison sentence and a €23.8 million fine for the alleged tax fraud offenses. The singer declared "a total violation of her rights". On 27 September 2022, a Spanish judge in Esplugues de Llobregat approved the tax fraud trial after prosecutors accused Shakira of failing to pay €14.5 million ($13.9 million) in taxes. She claimed she had already paid all owed amounts plus €3 million ($2.8 million) as interest. The Barcelona judge, Ana Duro, said the trial date would be set after she receives the necessary qualifying papers from both parties.
On 20 November 2023, at the commencement of the trial, the deal with prosecutors was finally reached and Shakira settled the case by paying a €7.5 million fine. In a statement, she cited her well-being and the interest of her children as factors influencing her decision.


== Discography ==


== Tours ==

Pies Descalzos International Tour (1995–1997)
Tour Anfibio (2000)
Tour of the Mongoose (2002–2003)
Oral Fixation Tour (2006–2007)
The Sun Comes Out World Tour (2010–2011)
El Dorado World Tour (2018)
Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran World Tour (2025)


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


=== Film ===


== See also ==

List of artists who reached number one in the United States
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart
Best-selling international artists in Brazil
List of best-selling Latin music artists
List of best-selling music artists
List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists
Women in Latin music
List of Colombians
List of highest-certified music artists in Germany
List of largest music deals


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
VH1 Driven: Shakira (article)
VH1 Driven: Shakira (video)
"Video – VH1 – Driven Shakira (11–22–05)". ShakiraMedia.com. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
Book: Woman Full of Grace by Ximena Diego
"Shakira: Woman Full of Grace ~ Ximena Diego ~ eBookMall ~ eBooks". Ebookmall.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
Pareles, Jon (14 November 2005). "Shakira, from lip to hip". New Straits Times, p. L3.
"Shakira pertahan orang Arab". (8 November 2005). Berita Harian, p. 13.
Frank Cogan's review of Laundry Service for The Village Voice
"New York Music – River Deep, Freckle High – page 1". The Village Voice. 25 December 2001. Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
Chart Performance for "Don't Bother" from the Billboard Hot 100
Chart Performance for Oral Fixation 2
"Building Album Sales Chart". HITS Daily Double. Archived from the original on 15 September 2014. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
New York Times Magazine article on Shakira's philanthropic work on education.


== External links ==

Official website
Shakira at AllMusic
Shakira at IMDb