Shutter Island is a 2010 American neo-noir psychological thriller film directed by Martin Scorsese. The screenplay was adapted by Laeta Kalogridis from the 2003 novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane. It follows Deputy U.S. Marshal Edward "Teddy" Daniels, and his partner Chuck, who come to the fictional Shutter Island in Boston Harbour to investigate its criminal psychiatric facility after one of its patients goes missing; Daniels has his own ulterior motives for taking the case. The film stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Mark Ruffalo, with Ben Kingsley, Max von Sydow and Michelle Williams in supporting roles.
Development began when Phoenix Pictures acquired the film rights to the novel directly from Lehane after Columbia Pictures had allowed their rights to lapse in 2003. Phoenix hired Laeta Kalogridis to work on a screenplay for a year, and in 2007 announced that Scorsese and DiCaprio had both joined the project. Production began on March 6, 2008 at various locations in Massachusetts – Long Island, while not used as a location, was the inspiration for the fictional island – including Peddocks Island (as the island), East Point (as the lighthouse), and the Medfield State Hospital (as the facility); filming ended on July 2, 2008.
Partnerning with Paramount Pictures, the film had its wide release on February 19, 2010 and received generally positive reviews from critics. It was chosen by the National Board of Review as one of the top ten films of 2010, and grossed $295 million worldwide. The film is also noted for its soundtrack, which prominently used classical music, such as that of Gustav Mahler, Krzysztof Penderecki, György Ligeti, John Cage, Ingram Marshall, and Max Richter.  In 2025, the film was voted for the "Readers' Choice" edition of The New York Times' list of "The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century," finishing at number 169.


== Plot ==
In 1954, U.S. Marshal Edward "Teddy" Daniels, and his new partner Chuck Aule, travel to Ashecliffe Hospital for the criminally insane on Shutter Island in Boston Harbor, to investigate the disappearance of Rachel Solando, a patient of the hospital who had drowned her three children.
The staff, led by psychiatrist Dr. John Cawley and his colleague Dr. Jerimiah Naehring, appear uncooperative. The marshals learn that Dr. Lester Sheehan, who was treating Solando, left the island on vacation immediately after Solando disappeared. Teddy experiences migraines, flashbacks of his time as a U.S. soldier in the liberation of Dachau, and vivid dreams of his wife Dolores who was killed in a fire in their building set by pyromaniac Andrew Laeddis. Teddy tells Chuck that he took this case to find Laeddis who he believes is a patient. Solando suddenly resurfaces but believes Teddy is her husband. Later, Teddy breaks into the restricted Ward C to find Laeddis, but meets patient George Noyce, who acts as if he knows Teddy. Noyce says that the doctors experiment on patients and lobotomize them in the lighthouse. He warns Teddy that everyone will deceive him and not to trust his partner, Chuck.
Teddy and Chuck climb the cliffs toward the lighthouse but are separated. Believing he saw Chuck's body on the rocks below, Teddy climbs down but finds only a cave where a woman claiming to be the real Rachel Solando is hiding. She reveals that she is a former psychiatrist who discovered clandestine experiments on mind control at the facility, and was forcibly committed to silence her. She warns that Cawley and Naehring will use his war trauma to feign a psychotic break, allowing them to have him also committed. Teddy returns to the hospital and when he asks about Chuck, Cawley insists that Teddy arrived to Shutter Island alone.
Convinced Chuck has been taken to the lighthouse, Teddy is intercepted by Naehring who attempts to sedate him. Teddy overpowers him and breaks into the lighthouse to discover Cawley waiting for him.  Cawley tells him that Rachel Solando never existed and that Teddy has not been drugged but is experiencing withdrawals from chlorpromazine, a neuroleptic medication Teddy has been taking for the past two years. Chuck arrives and reveals that he is Dr. Sheehan. "Teddy" is really Andrew Laeddis, a former U.S. Marshal incarcerated at Ashecliffe for murdering his manic depressive wife after she drowned their three children. Andrew did not seek treatment for Dolores when she burned down their apartment and instead moved his family to a lakehouse, where Dolores carried out the killings. Andrew's delusion is a result of his guilt and he created the alternate persona of Edward Daniels. The "investigation" of Rachel Solando was an elaborate roleplay, supported by the staff, to help Andrew play out his delusion so that he might break out of it, and remember his reality. Overwhelmed, Andrew faints.
Awakening later, Andrew recounts the truth, satisfying the doctors that he is lucid. Cawley notes that they had achieved this state nine months ago, but that Andrew had quickly regressed. He warns that this will be Andrew's last chance and if he lapses again he will be lobotomized due to his violent conduct towards the guards and other patients, such as Noyce. Sometime later, Andrew relaxes on the hospital grounds with Sheehan. Appearing delusional, he refers to Sheehan as "Chuck" and says that they must leave the island. Sheehan signals to a watching Cawley, who orders that Andrew be lobotomized. Andrew asks Sheehan if it would be worse "to live as a monster, or to die as a good man". A stunned Sheehan calls Andrew "Teddy" but the latter does not respond and leaves peacefully with the orderlies for his operation.


== Cast ==

Leonardo DiCaprio as Edward "Teddy" Daniels, a former U.S. Marshal who investigates the Shutter Island insane asylum
Mark Ruffalo as Chuck Aule, Teddy's Marshal partner
Ben Kingsley as Dr. John Cawley, a senior psychiatrist at Shutter Island
Max von Sydow as Dr. Naehring, a colleague of Cawley
Michelle Williams as Dolores Chanal, Teddy's wife
Emily Mortimer and Patricia Clarkson as Rachel Solando
Jackie Earle Haley as George Noyce, a patient in Ward C
Ted Levine as Warden
John Carroll Lynch as Deputy Warden McPherson
Joseph Sikora as Glen Miga
Elias Koteas as Laeddis
Robin Bartlett as Bridget Kearns
Christopher Denham as Peter Breene
Curtiss Cook as Trey Washington


== Production ==


=== Development ===
The rights to Dennis Lehane's novel Shutter Island were first optioned to Columbia Pictures in 2003. Columbia did not act on the option, and it lapsed back to Lehane, who sold it to Phoenix Pictures. Phoenix hired Laeta Kalogridis, and together they developed the film for a year. Director Martin Scorsese and actor Leonardo DiCaprio were both attracted to the project. Production began on March 6, 2008, only about 6 weeks after Michelle Williams' former partner Heath Ledger unexpectedly died.
Lehane's inspiration for the hospital and island setting was Long Island in Boston Harbor, which he had visited during the blizzard of 1978 as a child with his uncle and family.


=== Filming ===
Shutter Island was mainly filmed in Massachusetts, with Taunton being the location for the World War II flashback scenes. Old industrial buildings in Taunton's Whittenton Mills Complex replicated the Dachau concentration camp. The old Medfield State Hospital in Medfield, Massachusetts, was another key location. Cawley's office scenes were the second floor of the chapel during the late evening. Lights were shone through the windows to make it look like it was daytime. The crew painted the hospital's brick walls to look like plywood. This served the dual purpose of acting as scenery and blocking the set from view of a local road. The crew wanted to film at the old Worcester State Hospital, but demolition of surrounding buildings made it impossible. The stone lodge, next to Leach Pond, at Borderland State Park in Easton, Massachusetts, was used for the cabin scene. The film used Peddocks Island as a setting for the story's island. East Point, in Nahant, Massachusetts, was the location for the lighthouse scenes. The scenes where Teddy and Chuck are caught in the hurricane were filmed at the Wilson Mountain Reservation in Dedham, Massachusetts. Filming ended on July 2, 2008.


== Music ==

Shutter Island: Music from the Motion Picture was released on February 2, 2010, by Rhino Records. The film does not have an original score. Instead, Scorsese's longtime collaborator Robbie Robertson created an ensemble of previously recorded material to use in the film. According to a statement on Paramount's website: "The collection of modern classical music [on the soundtrack album] was hand-selected by Robertson, who is proud of its scope and sound. 'This may be the most outrageous and beautiful soundtrack I've ever heard.' [Robertson stated]."


== Genre ==
Shutter Island is a period piece with nods to different films in the film noir and horror genres, paying particular homage to Alfred Hitchcock's works. Scorsese stated in an interview that the main reference to Teddy Daniels was Dana Andrews's character in Laura, and that he was also influenced by several very low-budget 1940s zombie movies made by Val Lewton. The main frame of the plot resembles that of William Peter Blatty's The Ninth Configuration, as well as The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari. La Croix noted that Shutter Island was a "complex and puzzling" work that borrowed from genres as diverse as detective, fantasy, and the psychological thriller.
There have been differing opinions over the ending of the film, in which Laeddis asks Dr. Sheehan, "which would be worse – to live as a monster, or to die as a good man?", a line that does not appear in the book. Professor James Gilligan of New York University was Scorsese's psychiatric adviser, and he said that Laeddis's last words mean: "I feel too guilty to go on living. I'm not going to actually commit suicide, but I'm going to vicariously commit suicide by handing myself over to these people who're going to lobotomize me." Dennis Lehane, however, said, "Personally, I think he has a momentary flash.... It's just one moment of sanity mixed in the midst of all the other delusions."


== Release ==

The film was originally scheduled to be released by Paramount Pictures in the United States and Canada on October 2, 2009. Paramount later announced it was going to push back the release date to February 19, 2010. Reports attribute the pushback to Paramount not having "the financing in 2009 to spend the $50 to $60 million necessary to market a big awards pic like this", to DiCaprio's unavailability to promote the film internationally, and to Paramount's hope that the economy might rebound enough by February 2010 that a film geared toward adult audiences would be more viable financially.
The film premiered at the 60th Berlin International Film Festival as part of the competition screening on February 13, 2010. Spanish distributor Manga Films distributed the film in Spain after winning a bidding war that reportedly reached the $6 million to $8 million range.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 69% based on 263 reviews, with an average rating of 6.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "It may not rank with Scorsese's best work, but Shutter Island's gleefully unapologetic genre thrills represent the director at his most unrestrained." On Metacritic, the film received a weighted average score of 63 out of 100, based on 37 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average "C+" grade, on an A+ to F scale.
Lawrence Toppman of The Charlotte Observer gave the film four out of four stars, claiming, "After four decades, Martin Scorsese has earned the right to deliver a simple treatment of a simple theme with flair." Writing for The Wall Street Journal, John Anderson highly praised the film, suggesting it "requires multiple viewings to be fully realized as a work of art. Its process is more important than its story, its structure more important than the almost perfunctory plot twists it perpetrates. It's a thriller, a crime story and a tortured psychological parable about collective guilt."
Awarding the film three and a half stars out of four, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times wrote, "the movie is about: atmosphere, ominous portents, the erosion of Teddy's confidence and even his identity. It's all done with flawless directorial command. Scorsese has fear to evoke, and he does it with many notes."
The Orlando Sentinel's Roger Moore, who gave the film two and a half stars out of four, wrote, "It's not bad, but as Scorsese, America's greatest living filmmaker and film history buff should know, even Hitchcock came up short on occasion. See for yourself." Dana Stevens of Slate described the film "an aesthetically and at times intellectually exciting puzzle, but it's never emotionally involving". The Washington Post film critic Ann Hornaday negatively described the film as being "weird". A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote in his review that "Something TERRIBLE is afoot. Sadly, that something turns out to be the movie itself."
Keith Uhlich of Time Out New York named Shutter Island the fifth-best film of 2010.
In 2025, it was one of the films voted for the "Readers' Choice" edition of The New York Times' list of "The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century," finishing at number 169.


=== Box office ===
Shutter Island was released alongside The Ghost Writer, and with $41 million finished first at the box office and gave Scorsese his highest-grossing box office opening to-date. The film remained at #1 in its second weekend, with $22.2 million. Eventually, it grossed worldwide $294,805,697 and became Scorsese's second highest-grossing film worldwide. It is Scorsese's fifth movie to debut at the box office at #1 following Taxi Driver, Goodfellas, Cape Fear, and The Departed.


=== Home media ===
Shutter Island was released on DVD and Blu-ray on June 8, 2010, in the US and on August 2, 2010, in the UK. The UK release featured two editions—a standard edition and a limited steel-case edition. For the tenth anniversary of the film's release, Paramount Pictures released a 4K steelbook and Blu-ray version on February 11, 2020.


== Other media ==
A Shutter Island video game was released for PC in 2010. A Nintendo DS version was cancelled. In August 2014, Paramount Television and HBO were reported to be developing a prequel TV series, Ashecliffe.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Shutter Island at the AFI Catalog of Feature Films
Shutter Island on Facebook
Shutter Island at IMDb
Shutter Island at Box Office Mojo
Shutter Island at Rotten Tomatoes
Shutter Island at Metacritic