The Hunt (Danish: Jagten) is a 2012 Danish psychological drama film directed by Thomas Vinterberg and starring Mads Mikkelsen. Set in a small Danish village around Christmas, the film follows a man named Lucas, a divorced kindergarten teacher who becomes the target of mass hysteria after being accused of sexually abusing a child in his class.
The film gained critical acclaim for Mikkelsen's performance and Vinterberg's direction. Many have described it as one of the best psychological drama films of its time. It was competed at the 65th Cannes Film Festival, where Mikkelsen won the Best Actor Award for his role, and was also screened at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival, among other film festivals. It won the 2013 Nordic Council Film Prize and was one of the nominees for Best Foreign Language Film at the 71st Golden Globe Awards. It was the Danish entry for the Best Foreign Language Film category at the 86th Academy Awards and was selected as one of the final five nominees.


== Plot ==
Lucas is a member of a close-knit rural Danish community. He misses his teenage son, Marcus, who mostly lives with his ex-wife, but he gets along well with the young children at the local kindergarten where he has worked since the school at which he taught closed. When Marcus says he wants to live with Lucas and Lucas starts to date Nadja, a co-worker, his fortunes seem to be looking up.
Klara, who is the daughter of Lucas' best friend Theo as well as a pupil at Lucas' kindergarten, has a tendency to wander off on her own when her parents argue, and Lucas occasionally happens upon her when she is alone and helps her out. He accommodates her aversion to stepping on cracks and says she can walk his dog Fanny whenever she wants. Over time, Klara develops a crush on Lucas. When she kisses him on the mouth and gives him a small gift, he gently rebuffs her, and she becomes dejected. Using details from a pornographic picture shown to her by a friend of her older brother, Klara makes comments that lead Grethe, the director of the kindergarten, to believe Lucas exposed himself to her. Grethe invites an acquaintance to interview Klara, and after Klara nods in response to the man's leading questions, Grethe, who does not believe that children lie about such things, alerts the authorities and informs the parents of the children who attend the kindergarten. Klara later contradicts her initial story, but the adults see this as stemming from denial of what happened to her.
Lucas loses his job, his friendship with Theo is destroyed, and he is shunned by the community as a child molester and outcast. Due to the vague language used and the secrecy around the investigation, he does not know specifically what he is supposed to have done, but he eventually hears he may have been accused of abusing multiple children. The strain of this revelation leads him to break up with Nadja when he thinks she doubts his innocence.
Marcus runs away from his mother to be with Lucas. After a trip to the grocery store, where he is told that neither he nor his father are welcome anymore, he sees Lucas being arrested by the police. Locked out of the house, Marcus goes to ask Theo for a spare key and ends up fighting with several adults for confronting Klara and asking why she lied about his father. He is taken in by Bruun, one of Lucas' friends, who believes Lucas is innocent. Bruun tells Marcus that Lucas has a hearing in the morning and he is hopeful the case against Lucas will be dropped, since he has heard that all of the children's accounts of their abuse mention the same details of the basement of Lucas' house, which does not have a basement.
Lucas is released from custody, but someone kills his dog and throws a large stone through his window, so he sends Marcus back to his ex-wife and buries Fanny. On Christmas Eve, the staff of the grocery store beat him up and throw him out; however, he returns and headbutts the butcher to get his groceries back and buy them. Theo and his wife see Lucas limp out of the store bleeding from his head, and Lucas later notices them whispering during the Christmas church service. Lucas attacks Theo in front of the congregation and challenges him to look in his eyes for a sign he is lying about his innocence, since Theo had previously stated he can always tell when Lucas is lying. Lucas is escorted out of the church. When Theo visits Klara in her bedroom that night, she reaffirms that Lucas did not do anything bad to her. Theo brings Lucas food and alcohol, and the two men sit together and talk.
By the next fall, tensions in the community have lessened, Lucas' friends greet him again as before, and he and Nadja have gotten back together. Marcus receives his first rifle at a ceremony at Bruun's house. Afterwards Lucas and Klara reunite, and he carries her in his arms so she doesn't have to step on cracks. The adult men go hunting on the surrounding estate. When Lucas is by himself, a bullet barely misses him and hits a tree. He turns and watches as the shooter, silhouetted against the sun, reloads his rifle and points it at Lucas for a moment before fleeing. Lucas stands next to the bullet hole in silence, and the film ends.


== Cast ==
Mads Mikkelsen as Lucas
Thomas Bo Larsen as Theo, Lucas' best friend, Agnes' husband, and Klara's father
Annika Wedderkopp as Klara, Theo and Agnes' daughter
Lasse Fogelstrøm as Marcus, Lucas' son
Susse Wold as Grethe, Lucas' boss
Anne Louise Hassing as Agnes, Theo's wife and Klara's mother
Lars Ranthe as Bruun, Lucas' friend, Marcus' godfather
Alexandra Rapaport as Nadja, Lucas' girlfriend
Sebastian Bull Sarning as Torsten, Theo and Agnes' son, Klara's older brother, and Marcus' friend
Bjarne Henriksen as Ole


== Production ==
The film was produced by Zentropa for 20 million Danish kroner. It received co-production support from Sweden's Film i Väst and Zentropa International Sweden. Further support came from the Danish Film Institute, DR, Eurimages, Nordisk Film & TV Fond, the Swedish Film Institute, Sveriges Television, and the MEDIA Programme.


== Release ==

The Hunt premiered on 20 May 2012 at the Cannes Film Festival, where it was the first Danish-language film in the main competition since 1998. Mads Mikkelsen won the Best Actor Award at the festival.
The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the United States on 10 December 2013.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Given its estimated $3.8 million budget, the film was a financial success. Worldwide, it earned more than $16 million, including $7.9 million in Denmark. In the United States, it was shown in 47 theaters and earned $613,308.


=== Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 92% based on 131 reviews, with an average rating of 7.8/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Anchored by Mads Mikkelsen's sympathetic performance, The Hunt asks difficult questions with the courage to pursue answers head on." 
On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 77 out of 100 based on 30 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".The performance of Mads Mikkelsen as Lucas received widespread acclaim. Phillip French of The Guardian awarded the film four out of five stars, describing it as "gripping, unbearably tense, yet capable of great subtlety and nuance," and praising Mikkelsen as "one of the finest actors at work today." 
For his role, Mikkelsen won the Best Actor Award at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival. Writing for Variety, Peter Debruge called the performance impressive, with Mikkelsen cast against type as a warm-hearted man who finds himself caught up in a situation way beyond his control, making Lucas’ immediate isolation and subsequent frustration tangible.Critics also praised Thomas Vinterberg's direction and the screenplay he co-wrote with Tobias Lindholm. David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter described the film as the Danish director's most powerful since Festen, with the charge of pedophilia playing an explosive role in a chilling study of communal hysteria. Rooney commended the script's construction and the director's ability to build tension. 
In his review for the Chicago Sun-Times, Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of RogerEbert.com gave the film two out of four stars, calling it thematically rich but limited by its style, and noting its power in depicting how a community can band together against an individual in the guise of combating evil.Some reviews highlighted the film's provocative and unsettling nature. A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote that the film "is a merciless examination of the fear and savagery roiling just below the surface of bourgeois life." 
The film's ambiguous ending also generated considerable discussion among critics, who interpreted it as a statement on the permanent scars left by false accusations.In 2025, it was one of the films voted for the "Readers' Choice" edition of The New York Times's list of "The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century," finishing at number 268.


=== Accolades ===


== Stage adaptation ==
The Hunt was adapted for the stage in 2019 by David Farr, and produced at the Almeida Theatre in London. The production was directed by Rupert Goold and starred Tobias Menzies as Lucas. The production ran between 19 June and 3 August 2019.


== See also ==
List of submissions to the 86th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
List of Danish submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
The Children's Hour (film)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
The Hunt at IMDb
The Hunt at Box Office Mojo
The Hunt at Rotten Tomatoes
The Hunt at Metacritic 
The Hunt in the Danish Film Database