The Notebook is a 2004 American romantic drama film directed by Nick Cassavetes, from a screenplay by Jeremy Leven and Jan Sardi, and based on the 1996 novel by Nicholas Sparks. The film stars Ryan Gosling and Rachel McAdams as a young couple who fall in love in the 1940s. Their story is read from a notebook in the modern day by an elderly man, telling the tale to a fellow nursing home resident.
The Notebook had its world premiere at the Seattle International Film Festival on May 20, 2004, and was theatrically released in the United States on June 25, 2004. Despite generally mixed reviews from critics, Gosling and McAdams were singled out for praise for their performances. The film was a sleeper hit at the box office, grossing $117 million against its $29 million budget, and has become a cult classic in the years since its release. On November 11, 2012, an extended version premiered on ABC Family with deleted scenes added back into the original storyline.
The film earned several accolades, including the MTV Movie Award for Best Kiss for Gosling and McAdams at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards. At the 11th Screen Actors Guild Awards, James Garner was nominated for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role and the director's mother, Gena Rowlands, won Best Supporting Actress – Drama at the 9th Golden Satellite Awards.


== Plot ==
In 2004, the elderly Duke reads a romantic story from a notebook to a female nursing home patient. It recounts Noah Calhoun and Allison "Allie" Hamilton's love story.
In 1940, at Seabrook Island, South Carolina's carnival, lumber mill worker Noah falls in love at first sight with 17-year-old heiress Allie, who is visiting for the summer. Initially failing to impress her, he wears her down and they begin a summer romance. They fall madly in love, despite their differences.
As summer end nears, Noah discovers that Allie will be attending Sarah Lawrence College. He takes her to the abandoned Windsor Plantation, revealing his dream to repair it. Their lovemaking is interrupted by their friend Fin, who warns them Allie's parents enlisted the police to find her. Allie's mother Anne clearly declares her opposition to the relationship, forbidding her from seeing him. Overhearing, Noah tells Allie he does not see their future, so a distraught Allie breaks up with him but immediately regrets it.
The next morning, Anne announces their immediate early return to Charleston. Allie rushes to the mill to apologize to Noah, but he is away, so she asks Fin to tell him she loves him. Noah later rushes to Allie's, but too late.
Noah writes Allie every day for a year, but Allie's mother intercepts the letters. With no responses from her, he believes she has forgotten him so stops writing. Noah and Fin enlist, where Fin is killed in the Battle of the Bulge. Meanwhile, Allie nurses soldiers, meeting Captain Lon Hammond Jr., a young lawyer from old Southern money. They fall in love and become engaged, to Allie's parents' delight.
Noah returns from the war, discovering his father has sold their home so Noah can buy the Windsor Plantation. Soon after, his father dies, and Noah begins repairing the house. Although planning to sell it, he rejects all potential buyers. Noah has a casual relationship with war widow Martha Shaw. She wants more from him, but he cannot forget Allie.
Allie is excitedly trying on wedding dresses with her mother and friends, when she sees a newspaper photo of Noah at Windsor Plantation and faints. Her feelings for him came rushing back, so is compelled to see him once more before marrying Lon. Saying she needs some time for herself, Allie travels to Seabrook alone. Seeing each other for the first time in seven years, Noah is stunned, while a nervous Allie accidentally crashes when she tries to leave. He invites her inside, they have a pleasant conversation and she informs him of her engagement. They also reminisce about their time together and how in love they were.
The next day, going for a boat ride, Noah shows Allie a beautiful spot with geese. It begins to rain and, returning to the dock, Allie emotionally confronts Noah for not writing to her and that she waited for him for seven years. He tells her he wrote her 365 letters— everyday for a year. Declaring things are not over between them, Noah passionately kisses Allie. They go back to the house and make love. 
Noah and Allie spend the next few days in romantic bliss. At one point, Martha appears and is happy to see Noah finally with his true love. Anne arrives to warn Allie that Lon has come to Seabrook. Allie is angry with her mother for keeping the Noah's letters from her. 
Anne takes Allie to the lumber mill, pointing out a man she once also loved. She explains that, as he was lower-class she believed they had no future and she still wonders what their lives would have been like had she chosen differently. Anne hands Allie Noah's letters, and suggests she choose wisely.
Upon Allie's return, Noah asks Allie what she is going to do. She cannot give a definitive answer, which leads to an explosive argument. Noah feels betrayed that Allie might leave him again after being intimate. Allie reminds Noah she is still engaged to Lon. Noah asks Allie to stay with him, but Allie is unsure they can make things work. Acknowledging their relationship would not be easy, Noah is willing to put in the effort because he wants to be with her forever. 
Allie is torn, as whatever choice will hurt one of them. Noah insists she choose who she truly wants to be with, regardless of the consequences. Driving back to her hotel, sobbing and confused after reading the letters, Allie has a clarifying conversation with Lon. Then, she returns to Noah.
Back in 2004, the elderly woman is revealed to be dementia-afflicted Allie. Duke is actually Noah, who uses the pseudonym to not startle her. The book he reads to her is her journal, detailing their story to help her remember him. Noah has kept his promise to read it to her daily.
When Noah finishes reading the notebook, Allie remembers it is their story. She finally recognizes him, they embrace, then dance to their song, "I'll Be Seeing You", and she asks after their children. However, the dementia quickly returns, she panics at seeing a stranger touching her, so is sedated. 
Later, Duke has a heart attack and treated in the nursing home while Allie is taken to the dementia ward. Upon his recovery, Noah sneaks into her room in the night while the nurse turns a blind eye. Allie instantly recognizes him and they kiss, declaring she does not want to forget and wants them to "leave" together. The next morning, their bodies are found together, holding hands.


== Cast ==
Ryan Gosling as Noah Calhoun (young)
James Garner as Duke / Noah (old)
Rachel McAdams as Allison "Allie" Calhoun (née Hamilton), Noah's wife
Gena Rowlands as old Allie
Sam Shepard as Frank Calhoun, Noah's father
Joan Allen as Anne Hamilton, Allie's mother
James Marsden as Lon Hammond Jr.
Kevin Connolly as Fin
David Thornton as John Hamilton, Allie's father
Jamie Brown as Martha Shaw
Heather Wahlquist as Sara Tuffington
Ed Grady as Harry
Obba Babatunde as Bandleader
Starletta DuPois as Nurse Esther
Paul Johansson as Anne Hamilton's ex-boyfriend (uncredited)
Chubbs as Abner, a domesticated pig


== Production ==
The film rights to Nicholas Sparks' novel were acquired by New Line Cinema in 1996, represented by producer Mark Johnson. Jeremy Leven was hired to write the script, which caught the attention of director Steven Spielberg in 1998, who wished to film it with Tom Cruise as Noah Calhoun. Spielberg's commitment to other projects led to Jim Sheridan becoming attached to direct the following year. M. Night Shyamalan was also approached to direct but couldn't do it due to commitments to The Sixth Sense. Filming was to start in 1999 but pushed back over rewrites. Sheridan eventually backed out by October 2000 to work on In America. Martin Campbell entered negotiations to direct in March 2001, before he was replaced by Nick Cassavetes a year later. Early in development George Clooney was going to play Noah, and Paul Newman the older Noah, but after Clooney watched some Paul Newman movies he went up to Newman and said he did not look like him.


=== Casting ===
Cassavetes wanted someone unknown and "not handsome" to portray Noah; he chose Ryan Gosling for the role. Hayden Christensen was originally considered for the role. Gosling was initially surprised by this: "I read [the script] and I thought, 'He's crazy. I couldn't be more wrong for this movie.'" "It gave me an opportunity to play a character over a period of time – from 1940 to 1946 – that was quite profound and formative." To prepare for the part, Gosling temporarily moved to Charleston, South Carolina, prior to filming. During two months, he rowed the Ashley River and made furniture. When James Garner was approached for the role of the older Noah, he asked his agent if the script was for a television film, until he read it again and realized it had a universal appeal. A nationwide search was conducted to find the right actress to play Allie. Actresses who auditioned or considered for the role included Jessica Biel, Britney Spears, Jaime King, Jane McGregor, Jennifer Lawrence, Kate Beckinsale, Kate Bosworth, Amy Adams, Mandy Moore, Scarlett Johansson, Claire Danes, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Ashley Judd, and Reese Witherspoon, with the choice narrowed down to Britney Spears and Rachel McAdams with McAdams winning the role. On casting her, Cassavetes said: "When Rachel McAdams came in and read, it was apparent that she was the one. She and Ryan had great chemistry between them." She commented: "I thought it would be a dream to be able to do it. I read the script and went into the audition just two days later. It was a good way to do it because I was very full of the story." Gosling commented that, "I think that it's pretty fair to say that we probably wouldn't have made the film if we hadn't found Rachel... Really, Allie drives the movie. It's her movie and we're in it. It all kind of depended on an actress." In comparison to the book, the role was extended. McAdams spent time in Charleston before filming to familiarize herself with the surroundings, and took ballet and etiquette classes. She had a dialect coach to learn the Southern accent. Bradley Cooper was considered for Lon Hammond, while the studio pushed for Cole Hauser; but James Marsden was eventually cast.


=== Filming ===
The Notebook was filmed mostly on location in South Carolina, as well as the wintery battlefield just outside Montreal. Production offices for the film were set up at the old Charleston Naval Shipyard in North Charleston.
Much of the film's plot takes place in and around Seabrook Island, an actual town which is one of the South Carolina "sea island" localities, located 20 miles (32 km) southwest of Charleston. None of the filming took place in the Seabrook area, however, and instead utilized the surrounding areas. Specifically, the house that Noah is seen fixing up is a private residence at Wadmalaw Island, another locality situated 10 miles (16 km) closer to Charleston. The house was not actually in a dilapidated state at the time and instead was made to look that way by special effects. Contrary to the suggestion in the film's dialogue, neither the house nor the Seabrook area was home to South Carolina Revolutionary hero Francis Marion, whose plantation was actually located northwest of Charleston. The Boone Hall Plantation served as Allie's summer house.
Many of the scenes set in Seabrook were filmed in the town of Mt. Pleasant, (a suburb of Charleston). Other locations included: Edisto Island,  Cypress Gardens (in Moncks Corner, South Carolina) with trained birds that were brought in from elsewhere.
The nursing home scenes were filmed at Rice Hope Plantation, located in Georgetown County. The college depicted briefly in the film is identified in the film as Sarah Lawrence College, but the campus that is seen is the College of Charleston.


== Music ==
The soundtrack to The Notebook was released on June 8, 2004.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The film was released on June 25, 2004, in the United States and Canada and grossed $13.5 million from 2,303 theaters in its opening weekend, ranking number 4 at the box office. The film grossed a total of $115.6 million worldwide, $81 million in Canada and the United States and $34.6 million in other countries. It is the 15th highest-grossing romantic drama film of all time.


=== Critical response ===

According to review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, 54% of 182 critics gave the film a positive review, with an average rating of 5.7/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "It's hard not to admire its unabashed sentimentality, but The Notebook is too clumsily manipulative to rise above its melodramatic clichés." Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 53 out of 100, based on 34 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times praised the film, awarding it three-and-a-half stars out of four, calling the photography "striking in its rich, saturated effects" and stating that the "actors are blessed by good material." Peter Lowry of Film Threat gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of five; praising the performances of both Gosling and McAdams, he wrote: "Gosling and especially McAdams give all-star performances, doing just enough to hand the reins over to the pros, who take what's left of the film and finish the audience off with some touching scenes that don't leave a dry eye in the house." About the film itself, he added: "Overall, The Notebook is a surprisingly good film that manages to succeed where many other 'chick flick' like romances fail."
Stephen Holden of The New York Times gave the film a positive review, stating that "the scenes between the young lovers confronting adult authority have the same seething tension and lurking hysteria that the young Warren Beatty and Natalie Wood brought more than 40 years ago to their roles in Splendor in the Grass." Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post also gave the film a positive review, she also praised the performances of Gosling and McAdams, stating: "Never mind that McAdams and Gosling don't for a minute call to mind 1940s America; they're both suitably attractive and appealing. Gosling, who delivered a searing and largely unseen screen debut performance in the 2001 drama The Believer, is particularly convincing as a young man who charms his way past a girl's strongest defenses." About the film, she added: "Audiences craving big, gooey over-the-top romance have their must-see summer movie in The Notebook." William Arnold of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer praised the performance of McAdams but criticized the performance of Gosling, stating that he "just doesn't have the kind of star power or chemistry with McAdams to anchor this kind of minor-league Gone with the Wind." He also added about the film that it "doesn't completely work on its own terms, mainly because its romantic casting just doesn't spark: It doesn't make us fall in love with its lovers." Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe gave the film two-and-a-half stars, praising the performances of its cast members, writing about McAdams that "she's soulfully committed to the suds in the story and fiercely attentive to the other actors". He added about Gosling: "Gosling is adept at playing sociopaths and intense brooders, and there's reason to think, early on, that Noah might be similarly off, as when he threatens to drop from a Ferris wheel unless Allie agrees to go on a date with him." About the film, he wrote: "Considering the sunny, relatively pleasurable romantic business that precedes it, the elderly stuff seems dark, morbid, and forced upon us."
Jessica Winter of The Village Voice gave the film a mixed review, stating: "Amid the sticky-sweet swamp of Jeremy Leven's script, Rowlands and Garner emerge spotless and beatific, lending a magnanimous credibility to their scenes together. These two old pros slice cleanly through the thicket of sap-weeping dialogue and contrivance, locating the terror and desolation wrought by the cruel betrayals of a failing mind." Robert Koehler of Variety also gave the film a mixed review, he however, praised the performances, writing that "already one of the most intriguing young thesps, Gosling extends his range to pure romance without sacrificing a bit of his naturally subversive qualities, and even seems comfortable looking beautiful in a manly American way. The head-turner is McAdams, doing such a different perf from her top bitch in Mean Girls that it's hard to tell it's the same actor. She skillfully carries much of the film's emotional weight with a free and easy manner."
In June 2010, Entertainment Weekly included Allie and Noah in its list of the "100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years." The periodical listed The Notebook in their 25 Sexiest Movies Ever. Us Weekly included the film in its list of the 30 Most Romantic Movies of All Time. Boston.com ranked the film the third Top Romantic Movie. The Notebook appeared on Moviefone's list of the 25 Best Romance Movies of All Time. Marie Claire also put the film on its list of the 12 Most Romantic Movie Scenes of All Time. In 2011, The Notebook was named the best chick-flick during ABC News and People's television special Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time. The scene where Noah climbs the Ferris Wheel because he wants a date with Allie made the list of Total Film's 50 Most Romantic Movie Moments of All Time. The kiss in the rain was ranked No. 4 in Total Film's 50 Best Movie Kisses list. In 2025, it was one of the films voted for the "Readers' Choice" edition of The New York Times' list of "The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century," finishing at number 296.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Home media ==
The Notebook was released on VHS and DVD on February 8, 2005, and Blu-ray on May 4, 2010. By February 2010, the film had sold over 11 million copies on DVD.
In February 2019, subscribers to the UK version of Netflix reported that the version of the film on the streaming service had an alternate ending, which substituted a more light-hearted conclusion than the emotional end of the original release. Netflix responded that this alternate version of the film had been supplied to them in error, and soon replaced it with the original version.


== Television series ==
On August 11, 2015, it was reported that a television series was in development by The CW. The series was to follow Noah and Allie's courtship following the events of the film, and in a post-WWII world. As of December 2023, no further news has been revealed.


== Stage musical ==

On January 3, 2019, Ingrid Michaelson announced she would be writing the music and lyrics for a musical adaption of The Notebook with a book by Bekah Brunstetter. Sparks will also be involved as a producer alongside Kevin McCollum and Kurt Deutsch.
The production was initially slated for fall 2020 but was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic.  Michaelson and Brunstetter used the additional time to hold online previews and tweak their work.
The musical opened on September 6, 2022, at the Chicago Shakespeare Theatre and received generally positive reviews. Stephen Oxman of the Chicago Sun-Times said, "I simply was not expecting to fall in love with 'The Notebook,'... But I have." Adding, "It’s a significant leap in artistic quality over its sources, which it respects, while also providing a clear, resonant, and unique voice of its own." Jonathan Abarbanel of Theater Mania noted what while the musical used the novel for its basis rather than the film, he noted that Michaelson and Brunstetter shifted the time period twenty years to begin in the late 1960s causing Noah to leave for the Vietnam War rather than World War II.  The production closed on October 30, 2022.
In August 2023, it was announced that the show would open on Broadway in the spring of 2024 at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theatre. The show opened on March 14, with a cast that included Maryann Plunkett as Older Allie, Dorian Harewood as Older Noah, Joy Woods as Middle Allie, Ryan Vasquez as Middle Noah, Jordan Tyson as Younger Allie, and John Cardoza as Younger Noah.


== References ==


== External links ==

The Notebook at IMDb
The Notebook at Box Office Mojo
The Notebook at Rotten Tomatoes
The Notebook at Metacritic