Train to Busan (Korean: 부산행; RR: Busanhaeng; MR: Pusanhaeng; lit. To Busan) is a 2016 South Korean  action horror film directed by Yeon Sang-ho, written by Park Joo-suk, and starring Gong Yoo, Jung Yu-mi, Ma Dong-seok, Kim Su-an, Choi Woo-shik, Ahn So-hee, and Kim Eui-sung. The film mostly takes place on a KTX from Seoul to Busan as a zombie apocalypse suddenly breaks out in the country and threatens the safety of the passengers.
The film premiered in the Midnight Screenings section of the 2016 Cannes Film Festival on May 13. On August 7, the film set a record as the first Korean film of 2016 to break the audience record of over 10 million theatergoers.
The movie successfully launched the Train to Busan film series, with the animated prequel Seoul Station released in 2016 and a standalone sequel named Peninsula released in 2020. Another installment and an American-produced adaptation are also in development.


== Plot ==
Fund manager Seok-woo is a cynical workaholic and divorced father. His estranged daughter Su-an wishes to spend her birthday with her mother Na-young in Busan. Seok-woo sees a video of Su-an attempting to sing "Aloha ʻOe" at her singing recital and succumbing to stage fright as a result of his absence. Overcome with guilt, he decides to grant Su-an's birthday wish. The next day, they board the KTX 101 at Seoul Station, bound for Busan. Other passengers include blue-collar worker Sang-hwa and his pregnant wife Seong-kyeong; COO Yon-suk; a high school baseball team including player Yong-guk and his cheerleader girlfriend Jin-hee; elderly sisters In-gil and Jong-gil; and a traumatized homeless stowaway hiding in the bathroom. Just before departure, an ill, bitten woman boards unnoticed, soon turning into a zombie, biting and infecting a train attendant, sparking a rapid outbreak on the train.
The survivors flee to another car and secure the doors. News reports and phone calls confirm that an epidemic is spreading southward across the country. The conductor is instructed to stop at Daejeon Station and disembark the passengers, but the station is surrounded by zombies of former soldiers. They hastily retreat to the train, becoming separated into different cars in the chaos. Seok-woo learns from an employee that his company is indirectly responsible for the outbreak. The conductor cancels all future stops except Busan, where the military has established a quarantine zone. Seok-woo, Sang-hwa, and Yong-guk sneak and fight through the zombie horde to reunite with Su-an, Seong-kyeong, In-gil, and the homeless man in another car. They struggle toward the front car, where the remaining passengers have taken shelter. Prompted by Yon-suk and train attendant Ki-chul, the passengers deny entry, fearing infection. Sang-hwa sacrifices himself to buy the others time to force open the door and enter, but In-gil is killed in the process.
Yon-suk, Ki-chul, and the passengers demand that the survivors isolate themselves in the front vestibule. However, Jong-gil, distraught over her sister's death and disgusted by the passengers, deliberately opens the door to allow the zombies to enter and kill the remaining passengers in the car. Yon-suk and Ki-chul escape by hiding in the bathroom.
A blocked track at the East Daegu Station forces the survivors to stop and search for another train. Yon-suk escapes after pushing Ki-chul into the zombies. A flaming locomotive derails, separating the group and trapping Seok-woo, Su-an, Seong-kyeong and the homeless man beneath a carriage swarming with zombies. Meanwhile, Yon-suk runs into Jin-hee and Yong-guk, pushing the former into a zombie in his attempt to escape. Heartbroken, Yong-guk remains with Jin-hee until she turns and kills him. The conductor starts another locomotive on a separate track but is thrown to the zombies while trying to help an injured Yon-suk. Seok-woo finds a way out from under the carriage, but it is blocked by falling debris shortly after. The homeless man sacrifices himself to buy Seok-woo time to clear the debris, allowing Seok-woo, Su-an, and Seong-kyeong to escape and board the new locomotive.
The group encounters Yon-suk, who is on the verge of turning and desperately begging for help. Seok-woo manages to push him off but is bitten in the process. He puts Su-an and Seong-kyeong inside the engine room, teaches Seong-kyeong how to operate the train, and says a final farewell to Su-an. In his last moments before turning, he reminisces Su-an's birth before throwing himself off the locomotive.
Later, a blocked track forces Su-an and Seong-kyeong to stop the train before a tunnel just outside Busan. They leave the train and continue on foot along the tracks through the tunnel. Snipers stationed on the other side of the tunnel spot them, and prepare to shoot, mistaking them for zombies, but stand down when they hear Su-an singing "Aloha 'Oe", in tribute to her father.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
The film is based on an original story created by Park Joo-suk. To develop the zombie movements, the production team referenced the game 7 Days to Die and the movements of the dolls from Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence, in addition to reviewing the nurses' movements in Silent Hill. Technical Art Studio Cell handled the special effects makeup for the zombies. The team used an airbrush to draw the zombies' blood vessels, and their styling was varied depending on the stage of infection.
Filming took place in various stations across Daejeon, Cheonan, and East Daegu. The water deer featured in the movie was created using a combination of real footage and 3D modeling. The scenery outside the train was achieved using an LED plate rear screen technique positioned behind the set, which was based on the interior of the KTX-I. This method facilitated a greater focus on the characters. 


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Train to Busan grossed $80.5 million in South Korea, $2.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $15.8 million in other territories, for a total worldwide gross of $98.5 million.
It became the highest-grossing Korean film in Malaysia, Hong Kong, and Singapore. In South Korea, it recorded more than 11 million moviegoers and was the highest-grossing film of the year.


=== Critical response ===
Train to Busan received positive reviews from critics. The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 95% of 129 critics have given the film a positive review with an average rating of 7.70/10. The website's critics consensus states: "Train to Busan delivers a thrillingly unique—and purely entertaining—take on the zombie genre, with fully realized characters and plenty of social commentary to underscore the bursts of skillfully staged action." Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, assigned the film an average score of 73 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Clark Collis of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the film "borrows heavily from World War Z in its depiction of the fast-moving undead masses while also boasting an emotional core the Brad Pitt-starring extravaganza often lacked," adding that "the result is first-class throughout." At The New York Times, Jeannette Catsoulis selected the film as her "Critic's Pick" and took notice of its subtle class warfare. Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com opinionated in his positive review, "After the near-perfect first hour of “Train to Busan,” the film slows its progress and makes a few stops that feel repetitive, but the journey recovers nicely for a memorable finale. You could call it “Train of the Living Dead” or “’Snowpiercer’ with Zombies.” Whatever you call it, if it’s playing in your city and you’ve ever been entertained by a zombie movie, it’s hard to believe you wouldn’t be entertained by this one." 
In a more mixed review, David Ehrlich of IndieWire comments that "as the characters whittle away into archetypes (and start making senseless decisions), the spectacle also sheds its unique personality."
In 2016, British filmmaker Edgar Wright, director of zombie comedy Shaun of the Dead, highly applauded the film, personally recommending it on Twitter and calling it the "best zombie movie I've seen in forever." Rotten Tomatoes lists the film on its 100 Best Zombie Movies, ranked by Tomatometer.
In 2025, it was one of the films voted for the "Readers' Choice" edition of The New York Times' list of "The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century," finishing at number 308.


=== Accolades ===


== Home media ==
American distributor Well Go USA released DVD and Blu-ray versions of Train to Busan on 17 January 2017. FNC Add Culture released the Korean DVD and Blu-ray versions on 22 February 2017. It is also available on Rakuten Viki and Amazon Prime Video streaming. The Indian version is a minute shorter than the original version due to a few violent zombie shots being censored.
In the United Kingdom, it was 2017's fourth best-selling foreign language film on home video (below Operation Chromite, Your Name, and Guardians). It was later 2020's sixth best-selling foreign language film in the UK, and third best-selling Korean film (below Parasite and Train to Busan Presents: Peninsula).


== Follow-ups ==


=== Prequel ===

An animated prequel, Seoul Station, also directed by Yeon, was released on August 18, 2016. Shim Eun-kyung, who played as the runaway girl that triggered the spread of the virus inside the train, appeared as a voice actress for the main character Hye-sun.


=== Sequel ===

Peninsula, a standalone sequel set four years after Train to Busan and also directed by Yeon, was released in South Korea on July 15, 2020 to mixed reviews. Yeon has stated that, Peninsula is not a sequel to Train to Busan because it's not a continuation of the story, but it happens in the same universe.


=== Spin-off ===
In 2016, Gaumont acquired the rights for the English-language remake of the film from Next Entertainment World. In 2018, New Line Cinema, Atomic Monster and Coin Operated were announced to be the co-producing partners for the remake, with Warner Bros. Pictures distributing worldwide, except for France and South Korea. Indonesian director Timo Tjahjanto is in talks to helm the film, while Gary Dauberman adapts the screenplay and co-produces the film alongside James Wan. In December 2021, the film's official title was revealed to be The Last Train to New York, scheduled to be released on April 21, 2023. However, in July 2022, Warner Bros. removed the film from the release schedule with Evil Dead Rise, another New Line Cinema film, taking its original release date.
On June 26, 2025, James Wan tells to Entertainment Weekly that the film is a passion project for them and Wan confirmed that the Last Train to New York is not a remake but more of a spin-off and he also add that the film is set at the exact same time as the original film.


== See also ==
Snowpiercer: Post-apocalyptic action movie set on a train
Trip Ubusan: The Lolas vs. Zombies: Filipino comedy movie whose name is inspired by this film's


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Train to Busan at the Korean Movie Database (in Korean)
Train to Busan at IMDb
Train to Busan at Rotten Tomatoes
Train to Busan at Metacritic 
Train to Busan at HanCinema