In the Heat of the Sun (阳光灿烂的日子) is a 1994 Chinese coming-of-age film written and directed by Jiang Wen, marking his directorial debut.  Loosely adapted from Wang Shuo's novel Wild Beast, the film offers a nostalgic lens of life during the Cultural Revolution - one not defined by political trauma, but by adolescent mischief, desire, and memory. 
The film's original title, which roughly translates to "Bright Sunny Days"  was changed to "In the Heat of the Sun" for international audiences during a film festival in Taiwan. The new title was chosen to minimize association with the Cultural Revolution.


== Synopsis ==
Set in Beijing during the early 1970s, at the height of the Cultural Revolution, In the Heat of the Sun is narrated by an adult Ma Xiaojun reflecting on his teenage years. Known by his nickname "Monkey" (played by Xia Yu), he recounts a summer of misadventure and desire. With schools shut down and many parents away, Monkey and his friends roam the streets freely, indulging in aimless adventure and mischief. The story, based in part on Jiang Wen's own experiences during the revolution, unfolds in a series of fragmented memories.
Monkey's carefree routine takes a turn when he becomes infatuated with Mi Lan (played by Ning Jing), an older girl he encounters after sneaking into her apartment using a skeleton key. Captivated by her image, he spends his days in the vicinity of her home and attempts to befriend her. Monkey eventually introduces Mi Lan to his group of friends, but tension rises when Mi Lan becomes romantically involved with Liu Yiku (played by Geng Le), one of Monkey's friends. 
The story takes a dark turn when Monkey acts violently towards Mi Lan. In the aftermath, the group drifts apart, mirroring the end of a youthful era. The film concludes years later, as the characters briefly reunite as adults.


== Production ==
Development & Financing 
In the Heat of the Sun began as an adaptation of Wang Shuo's novel Wild Beast, but Jiang Wen reshaped the novel into a coming-of-age story set in 1970s Beijing. Like the film's protagonist Ma Xiaojun, Jiang Wen grew up in Beijing's military housing compounds, and he chose to film on location in the city to enhance its authenticity and evoke the atmosphere of 1970s Beijing.
Production was co-financed by three Chinese studios, with around $2 million USD in funding coming from Hong Kong investors. However, the film faced serious financial difficulties early on. One sponsor, a real estate company, withdrew before the start of filming due to the economic recession and Executive Producer Liu Xiaoqing covered debts out of pocket. However, Hong Kong-based producer Jean-Louis Piel offered support after seeing an early cut of the film, helping fund sound mixing and other finishing work.

Adaption & Themes
Jiang Wen's adaptation diverges significantly from Wang Shuo's original novel. American critic Derek Elley noted that Jiang Wen's adaption altered "some 70% of the original" novel and adds " a mass of personal memories." 
Several characters and events were softened or reimagined. As Daniel Vukovich, author of China and Orientalism: Western Knowledge Production and the PRC observed, the film reframes its characters as "a small group of male friends, plus one female comrade" instead of "violent hooligans."  Mi Lan, a girl the boys idolize, is even given more screen time and emotional focus in the film than in the novel. In general, Jiang Wen downplays ideological critique and heightens nostalgia: his youths are mischievous and romantic rather than hard-bitten and angry.
These changes alter the story's tone and focus. The novel's raw, cynical snapshot of alienated youth becomes, in the film, a wistful coming-of-age reminiscence. Scholars note that In the Heat of the Sun takes on a "somewhat celebratory tone," unlike the accusatory or tragic styles of earlier Cultural Revolution films. In other words, Jiang's movie looks back on the era with warmth and nostalgia, even as it recalls youthful chaos. While Wild Beast emphasized disillusionment and streetwise cynicism, In the Heat of the Sun emphasizes friendship, romance, and the bittersweet loss of innocence. Critics point out that because Jiang reshaped the novel around his own memories, the film downplays some of the novel's harsher elements and reframes the group's adventures as poignant childhood memories. This shift in emphasis – from the novel's edgy, hooligan-inflected tone to the film's nostalgic, exuberant style – changes the impact of the story. The film feels more sentimental and personal, whereas the novel felt more confrontational and rawer.

Casting

Han Dong – Ma Xiaojun (马小军; 馬小軍; Mǎ Xiǎojūn), as a young boy.
Xia Yu – Ma Xiaojun (teenage Monkey). Wendy Larson, author of From Ah Q to Lei Feng: Freud and Revolutionary Spirit in 20th Century China, wrote that the selection of "an awkward-looking boy" who "contrasts with the more conventional tall good looks" of Liu Yiku was clever on part of Jiang Wen, and that Xia Yu "portrays [Ma Xiaojun] as charmingly shy and mischievous in social relationships yet forceful and engaging in his emotions." The character has the nickname "Monkey" in the film version. "Monkey" was the nickname of director Jiang Wen. Derek Elley of Variety says that Xia as Xiaojun has "both an uncanny resemblance to Jiang himself and a likable combination of insolence and innocence."
Feng Xiaogang – Mr. Hu (胡老师; 胡老師; Hú-lǎoshī), the teacher.
Geng Le – Liu Yiku (刘忆苦; 劉憶苦; Liú Yìkǔ), as a teenager.
Jiang Wen – Ma Xiaojun, as an adult (incl. narration).
Ning Jing – Mi Lan (米兰; 米蘭; Mǐ Lán).
Tao Hong – Yu Beibei (Chinese: 于北蓓; pinyin: Yú Běibèi). In the beginning Yu Beibei accompanies the boys and gives rise to sexual tension amongst them, but after Mi Lan is introduced, Yu Beibei does not appear with the group until the second telling of the birthday party. Larson states that Yu Beibei "is a significant character" in the first part of the film and that her disappearance is a "persistent clue that all is not as it seems".
Shang Nan – Liu Sitian (刘思甜; 劉思甜; Liú Sītián).
Wang Hai – Big Ant.
Liu Xiaoning – Liu Yiku, as an adult.
Siqin Gaowa – Zhai Ru (翟茹; Zhái Rú – Xiaojun's mother).
Wang Xueqi – Ma Wenzhong (马文中; 馬文中; Mǎ Wénzhōng – Xiaojun's father).
Fang Hua – Old general.
Dai Shaobo – Yang Gao (羊搞; Yáng Gǎo).
Zuo Xiaoqing – Zhang Xiaomei.
Yao Erga – Fat fool (傻子; Shǎ zi).
Jiang Wen took an unconventional approach to casing, choosing several young individuals with no prior acting experience but strong athletic backgrounds. Xia Yu, who played the teenage Ma Xiaojun, was the skateboarding champion in his hometown Qingdao. He was cast partly due to his "uncanny resemblance to Jiang Wen himself and a likable combination of insolence and innocence." 
Tao Hong, a synchronized swimmer, and Zuo Xiaoqing, a rhythmic gymnast,  also made their acting debuts in the film. Many of the young cast members were under 14 years old and had dropped out of school, helping ground the film in the lived experiences of its characters.
Originally, Jiang Wen filmed himself playing the adult Ma Xiaojun in several scenes. However, unsatisfied with his performance and due to time limits, he eventually chose to remove these scenes from the final cut.

Filming & Style
This cinematography of the film was handled by Gu Changwei, one of Mainland China's most acclaimed photographers. Gu Changwei's previous works includes films such as Red Sorghum, Ju dou, and Farewell My Concubine. 
The production notably used a golden-yellow color palette to evoke a dreamlike and sentimental atmosphere. In contrast to the more historical, often politically charged portrayals of the Cultural Revolution seen in the works of  5th-generation Chinese filmmakers (e.g., Zhang Yimou, Chen Kaige, Tian Zhuangzhuang), In The Heat Of the Sun is mellow and dream-like, portraying memories of that era with somewhat positive and personal resonances. The film's nostalgic perspective is established earlier on in the film as the narrator, Ma Xiaojun, reflects on the past, acknowledging the unreliability of his memory. He states in the prologue: "Change has wiped out my memories. I can't tell what's imagined from what's real," setting the stage for alternative or imagined version of events, as the film explores how people romanticize their youthful memories.
In one scene, Jiang Wen gives Ma Xiaojun's memory a hazy, dreamlike quality, emphasizing the subjectivity of memory over objective fact. To reinforce this idea, he employs a Brechtian technique: the image suddenly freezes while the narrator pauses to reflect. This deliberate break in the narrative flow draws attention to the story's unreliability and encourages the audience to see the moment as filtered through personal memory rather than reality.
The film also broke new ground in mainland China cinema through its frank depiction of adolescent sexuality. Scenes such as shower sequences involving boys and a topless shot of Mi Lan challenged censorship norms and introduced a level of openness rarely seen in contemporary Chinese films of the time.

Release, Censorship & Restoration
In the Heat of the Sun was completed after nearly two years of production and submitted to Chinese film censors. The State Film Bureau issued seven modification requests – mainly minor changes to dialogue – and insisted on removing or muting sensitive material.  Among the censorship concerts were politically sensitive content, including the prominent use of the Communist anthem L'Internationale in a street fight scene. Jiang Wen successfully argued to keep the scene, but the music's volume was heavily lowered in the final 1995 release. Other material deemed too frank was cut or muted. The film was released in China in 1995 with a run time of approximately 128 minutes, incorporating the necessary cuts and changes imposed by the censors.
In 2013, the film underwent a full digital restoration funded by Orange Sky Golden Harvest Entertainment in collaboration with Jiang Wen. The restored version features a high-definition scan and an upgraded 5.1‑channel soundtrack. Running about 140 minutes, it includes nearly 12 minutes of footage that had been removed from the original release for censorship or length, including the "dream within a dream" montage and an explicit dialogue scene that had been excised, as well as other material omitted from the 1995 version.
The restored In the Heat of the Sun premiered in the Venice Classics section in the 70th Venice International Film Festival. While critics praised the opportunity to see Jiang Wen's film in a more complete from, some noted that the restored print retained a grainy, vintage look rather than appearing sharply "refreshed."


== Reception ==
In the Heat of the Sun was widely acclaimed both domestically and internationally. The film won Best Actor for Xia Yu at the Venice Film Festival in 1994, making him the youngest recipient of the award. It also won numerous awards at the 33rd Golden Horse Awards in Taiwan, including Best Feature, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Cinematography and Best Sound Editing. Additionally, it was the first film from the People's Republic of China film to win Best Feature Film in the Golden Horse Awards, a significant milestone as it marked the first year where Chinese-language films from the mainland were allowed to participate.

Critical Acclaim
Immediately after its release, major critics praised it as the most important work in Chinese cinema since Zhang Yimou's Red Sorghum (1987). Like Zhang Yimou's film, In the Heat of the Sun reinvented cinematic language while retelling a key moment in China's history, highlighting the film's significance within the evolution of Chinese cinema.
In 1995, In the Heat of the Sun was a domestic box office hit, surpassing Hollywood blockbusters like The True Lies, Lion King and Forrest Gump. Critics praised the film's cinematography, its emotional depth, and its innovative narrative style. It was also one of the first major Chinese films to directly engage with the Cultural Revolution from a highly personal and introspective perspective. Scholars have since regarded the film as a landmark in Sixth Generation Chinese cinema, both for its stylistic choices and for its subtle political commentary.

Controversy
Despite its success, the film also stirred controversy in China. Some critics such as "scar literature" writer Feng Jicai, criticized the film for its "indiscriminate nostalgia" and "positive" portrayal of the Cultural Revolution, arguing that it lacked the harsh realities many had experienced.
According to Vukovich, the film "received much less attention than any fifth-generation classics" despite the "critical appreciation in festivals abroad". Vukovich stated that in Western countries "the film has been subjected to an all too familiar coding as yet another secretly subversive, dissenting critique of Maoist and Cultural Revolution totalitarianism", with the exceptions being the analyses of Chen Xiaoming from Mainland China and Wendy Larson.


== Trivia ==
Jiang Wen, having lived through the Cultural Revolution, intentionally avoided the stereotypical imagery often associated with the Cultural Revolution, such as Red Guards wielding Mao's Little Red Book. Instead, his film presents a more intimate and less overtly political view of the era, showing children dancing and holding flowers together in the playground.
Before making his directorial debut, Jiang Wen has contributed to uncredited writing or revisions on several influential films such as Red Sorghum (1987), Li Lianying: The Imperial Eunuch (1991) and Black Snow (1990).
Jiang Wen asked the photographer not to be a spectator but to be a role in the film, which posed a great challenge to the choice of viewpoints.


== Music ==
Cavalleria Rusticana
One of the most prominent pieces is Pietro Mascagni's Cavalleria Rusticana, which is played throughout the main plot. Mascagni's opera has been widely used in cinema and is known for its emotional intensity, featured in films like The Godfather III (1990) and Martin Scorsese's Raging Bull (1980). In the Heat of the Sun uses Cavalleria Rusticana "Intermezzo" as a leitmotif, evoking the film's nostalgic and romanticized tone, particularly in scenes that focus on the Ma Xiaojun's longing and desire for Mi Lan.

Moscow Nights
The film also uses the Chinese version of Moscow Nights, a well-known Soviet song which features in several key moments, contributing to the nostalgic atmosphere of the era.

L'Internationale
Another prominent piece used in the film is L'Internationale, a left-wing anthem that has been associated with the socialist movement since the late nineteenth century. The song is used as a dramatic element during the fight scene between two opposing gangs, creating a contrast between its revolutionary ideals and the impulsive violence of adolescence unfolding onscreen. Due to censorship concerns, the anthem's volume was significantly lowered in the final release.

Katyusha
In the Heat of the Sun also incorporates Katyusha (Russian:Катюша), a Soviet folk-based song composed by Matnvey Blanter in 1938. The song is widely known in China due to influence from the Soviet Union in the 1950s after a treaty of alliance signed between the PRC and Soviet Union. In the film, Katyusha plays during a peaceful celebration scene where the two opposing gangs come together to celebrate a momentary truce. 
In addition to these iconic songs, Jiang Wen incorporates a variety of revolutionary anthems including Chairman Mao, Revolutionary Soldiers Wish you a Long Life (毛主席，革命战士祝您万寿无疆), Missing Chairman Mao—the Savior (想念恩人毛主席), Ode to Beijing (北京颂歌) and Sun Shining on the Jinggang Mountain (井冈山上太阳红).


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== Bibliography ===
Bao, Ying. Remembering the invisible: Soundscape and memory of 1989, Journal of Chinese Cinemas, 2013, 7:3, 207–224, DOI: 10.1386/jcc.7.3.207_1
Braester, Yomi. Memory at a standstill: 'Street-smart history' in Jiang Wen's In the Heat of the Sun. Screen, 2001. 42 (4): 350–362. doi:10.1093/screen/42.4.350. ISSN 0036-9543
Jiang, Wen. ‘Yangguang zhong de jiyi: yi bu dianying de dansheng’/ ‘Recollections in the sun: The birth of a film’, Yibu dianying de dansheng/The Birth of a Film, Beijing: Huayi chubanshe, 1997. pp. 1–71.
Larson, Wendy. From Ah Q to Lei Feng: Freud and Revolutionary Spirit in 20th Century China. Stanford University Press, 2009. ISBN 0804769826, 9780804769822.
Li Junwei, "Structure and Strategy Evolution of Narrative in Jiang Wen’s film – Focus on ‘In The Heat of the Sun’, ‘The Sun Also Rises’, and ‘Let the Bullets Fly’", doi: 10. 3969 / j. issn. 1002 – 2236. 2016. 06. 023
Qian Gao, "HIDDEN IN THE HEAT OF THE SUN: MIMESIS, SACRILEGE AND APORIA—READING JIANG WEN’S FILMIC RECREATION OF THE CHINESE CULTURAL REVOLUTION", University of Redlands, 30 April 2014
Vukovich, Daniel. China and Orientalism: Western Knowledge Production and the PRC (Postcolonial Politics). Routledge, 17 June 2013. ISBN 113650592X, 9781136505928.
Wang Honghong, "The Interpretation and Innovation in Soundscape and Image in ‘The Heat of the Sun’".
Xiao Shuang, "Jiang Wen Indulges in ‘The Heat of the Sun’", DOI：10.16583/j.cnki.52-1014/j.1994.09.046
Zou, Hongyan, and Peter C Pugsley. “Chinese Films and the Sense of Place: Beijing as ‘Thirdspace’ from In the Heat of the Sun to Mr Six.” Making Publics, Making Places, edited by Mary Griffiths and Kim Barbour, University of Adelaide Press, South Australia, 2016, pp. 111–128. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/10.20851/j.ctt1t304qd.12. Accessed 13 June 2020.


== Further reading ==
Qi Wang. "Writing Against Oblivion: Personal Filmmaking from the Forsaken Generation in Post-socialist China." (dissertation) ProQuest, 2008. ISBN 0549900683, 9780549900689. p. 149–152.
Silbergeld, Jerome (2008), Body in Question: Image and Illusion in Two Chinese Films by Director Jiang Wen (Princeton: Princeton University Press)
Su, Mu (Beijing Film Academy). Sunny Teenager: A Review of the Movie in the Heat of the Sun. Strategic Book Publishing, 2013. ISBN 1625165080, 9781625165084. See page at Google Books.


== External links ==