Jair Ventura Filho (born 25 December 1944), better known as Jairzinho (Portuguese pronunciation: [ʒaˌiʁˈzĩɲu]), is a Brazilian former professional footballer. A quick, skillful, and powerful right winger known for his finishing ability and eye for goal, he was a key member and leading scorer of the Brazil national team that won the 1970 FIFA World Cup.
Jairzinho was nicknamed "the Hurricane" (Portuguese: o Furacão) in reference to the way his jersey would shake as he ran down the wing during his playing days. A versatile forward, he was also capable of playing in a variety of other attacking positions, as a main striker, second striker, or even as an attacking midfielder. He was known for his large afro towards the later stages of his career, as well as his burst of pace, dribbling, ball skills, finishing ability, shot power and physical strength due to his large muscular build. He is widely considered one of the greatest Brazilian players of all time.
Due to the economic and political situation of the time, as well as the Sport Legislation, Jairzinho played most of his club football in South America where he spent eleven years at Rio de Janeiro club Botafogo. He went on to play in Europe for Olympique de Marseille during the final years of his career, a common pattern for South American players until the 1980s, when the economic and political situation changed. Jairzinho replaced his footballing idol Garrincha in both the Botafogo and Brazil teams, and played in three consecutive World Cups: 1966, 1970 and 1974.


== Early years ==
Jair Ventura Filho was born on 25 December 1944 in Rio de Janeiro, Jairzinho's family left Duque de Caxias for Rio in the late 50s. Living on Rua General Severiano where he went through the youth setup at local club Botafogo.


== Club career ==


=== Botafogo ===

Jairzinho started his football career in 1958 aged 13 assigned to the Botafogo youth teams and working as a ball boy for the first team. He made his professional debut with the club as a striker at the age of fifteen in 1960. His idol Garrincha, whom he would eventually replace for both club and country, also played at Botafogo, albeit in Jairzinho's preferred position on the right wing. This resulted in Jairzinho spending most of his early games playing on the left wing or as a centre forward. However, he would fill in as a right winger, by far his strongest position, when Garrincha was injured.
Jairzinho finally established himself as a Botafogo regular in 1965 aged 21 and was seen as a phenomenal rising star to the entire nation. During this young age he was already playing with Brazil and Botafogo superstars such as Gérson, Mario Zagallo and Garrincha.

In 1968, Botafogo won the Brazilian double. Winners of the 1968 Campeonato Carioca and the Taça Guanabara in which Jairzinho would score 9 goals in 11 games. By this time Garrincha had already left Botafogo in 1966 and would enable Jairzinho to play in his natural right wing position. Botafogo would then top off the year with a 3rd trophy towards the end of the year winning the 1968 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A (Taça Brasil) The following 1969 Campeonato Carioca season he would score 7 goals, progressing onto the next 1970 Campeonato Carioca just before the World Cup Jairzinho would finish Botafogo's top scorer with 9 goals.
After Jairzinho's excellent display in Mexico at the 1970 FIFA World Cup more eyes of the world were focused on his Botofogo side. In the final four years of his time at Botafogo he'd prove to finalise himself as one of the club's most prolific goalscorers in the history of single starred Brazilian club, scoring 186 goals in 416 appearances with a goals per game ratio of 0,45. He ranks 6th in all time top goal scorers for Botafogo. One of his most standout performances starred in 1972 in which he scored a hattrick vs Flamengo during a famous 6–0 victory, one of the most memorable in Botafogo's history. In the same year he would also receive the Bronze Award for the South American Footballer of the Year.


=== Marseille ===
In 1974, when the sports legislation in Brazil finally changed, Jairzinho made a 1,250,000 FF (€300,000, £250,000) move to Ligue 1 side Olympique de Marseille, in October. One of the most expensive signings at the time, along with his Botafogo and Brazil teammate Paulo Cézar Caju.
Jairzinho was welcomed as a superstar by the OM fans, the day before his debut game against AS Monaco more than 10,000 fans came to attend the training session in order to watch his first moments at the club. Jairzinho scored in his first game vs Monaco in a 4–1 victory and was immediately seen as a prominent world class winger to dominate European football.

Jairzinho would go on to score 9 goals in only 18 league games, also notably delivering a memorable performance against FC Nantes in a victory 4–0 in the Coupe de France, scoring 2 goals. Though he made an impact with his goals and aura, his time ended shortly at the French side due to a scuffle in which both Jairzinho and Caju were allegedly found guilty of attacking one of the assistant referees, after a 2–2 draw in the first leg of the Coupe de France quarter-final against Paris Saint-Germain. The Groupement du football professionnel (the former LFP) suspended him and Caju for one year (plus one suspended), thus end up leaving in the summer of 1975.


=== Kaizer Chiefs ===
According to Jairzinho, Kaizer Chiefs co-owner Ewert Nene invited him to play a few games in reaction to his Marseille departure. Jairzinho agreed a short term deal until the start of 1976.
The stadium atmosphere each time he went on the pitch, the warm welcome, and the fact that he was "treated like a king" were the key reasons he agreed to sign, he subsequently said in an interview with the South African newspaper "Soccer Laduma" in 2018.
Jairzinho rarely played for the Chiefs though in only 3 league games, he scored 7 goals during his time in South Africa.


=== Cruzeiro ===
After the end of Jairzinho's contract in South Africa, he would finally rejoin his home country and reestablish himself as the world class forward he was known for. Jairzinho signed with Cruzeiro at the beginning of 1976, just days before the season campaign started.
Jairzinho would score 31 goals in 43 games across all competitions, finishing second highest goal scorer in the 1976 Copa Libertadores with 12 goals in 12 appearances whilst also winning the trophy, the first one for the brazilian club. Cruzeiro would then go on to play and ultimately be defeated at the 1976 Intercontinental Cup against Bayern Munich, losing the first leg 2–0 in Germany and drawing 0–0 at home.
Jairzinho would only spend a year at Cruzeiro, however a successful period.


=== Portuguesa ===
Jairzinho, while aged 32 and still seen as a naturally gifted player, surprised his peers when joining Venezuelan side Portuguesa in 1977.
Jairzinho made Portuguesa one of the greatest teams in Venezuelan history, helping Portuguesa win a record 16 games in a row and their fourth of five championships. He scored 22 league goals within 24 games, including 3 hattricks.


=== Noroeste and Fast Clube ===
Towards the final stages of his career, Jairzinho would have a brief spell at Brazilian club Noroeste competing in the 1978 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, in which Jairzinho would score 10 goals.
A year later Jairzinho would join 2nd tier Campeonato Amazonense side Fast Clube and would score another 10 goals throughout the year.


=== Jorge Wilstermann and return to Botafogo ===
In 1980, Jairzinho signed for Bolivian side Club Deportivo Jorge Wilstermann aged 35, scoring 6 goals in the Bolivian league campaign.
In 1981, Jairzinho would return to Botafogo for the last true season of his career in which he would be idolised by the upcoming youth players. He would score 1 goal in a friendly match in 1981 however featured in no competitive arrangement.


== International career ==

Jairzinho made his international debut as a 19 year old in 1964 against Portugal, again when Garrincha was injured. He played in the 1966 FIFA World Cup in England, however with Garrincha back in the side he played as a left winger. Jairzinho struggled to be effective in this position especially at his young age, and he couldn't prevent Brazil from exiting the competition at the first round. When, after the tournament, Garrincha announced his retirement from international football, Jairzinho finally took over his idol's role for Brazil on the right wing. Jairzinho scored 2 goals out of the 6 1970 FIFA World Cup qualification matches.

Now in his favourite position, Jairzinho became a far more effective and consistent performer for country. At the 1970 FIFA World Cup in Mexico, Jairzinho was one of stars of the tournament. He made history by scoring in every game Brazil played in for the Seleção, for which he received the epithet "Furacão da Copa" (World Cup Hurricane). His second goal vs Czechoslovakia was one of the best goals of the tournament, completing an incredible solo run, beating a total of 4 players to unleash a powerful low driven shot to ripple the bottom left corner, which goes down as one of the most memorable goals in World Cup history.

He scored his seventh goal of the tournament in Brazil's 4–1 world cup win over Italy in the final. However, his impressive goals tally at the finals were not enough to win the Golden Boot, which went to Germany's Gerd Müller, who scored ten goals. Jairzinho has claimed that FIFA awarded him a "best body on the planet" prize for his athleticism; however, FIFA has no record of this award.

Jairzinho scored two goals in the 1974 FIFA World Cup, which would prove to be his last World Cup for Brazil. The third-place final was his last match for Brazil until he was given a one-off farewell cap against Czechoslovakia on 3 March 1982 in a game which Brazil drew 1–1. He scored 33 goals in 81 games during his international career.


== Style of play ==

Jairzinho was feared as a versatile forward who could cause damage and impose a severe goal threat from any position on the field. He possessed high athlete level pace and a quick burst of acceleration, an excellent first touch and direct dribbling ability, however Jairzinho's most unique attribute was his strength.
On countless occasions many opposition defences would attempt to double up on Jairzinho and try deny him space in an effort to deny his direct goal threat imposed by his athleticism. He would apply himself as a hard working team player who would consistently track back and use his body structure to prevent opposition counter attacks by blocking or tracking runs.
Jairzinho's movement off the ball was one of the key aspects on which he accumulated so many goals throughout his career. In the 1970 FIFA World Cup he displayed his attacking instincts, especially with his goal vs England which earned Brazil the victory and broke the deadlock. The secondary run off Pelé for him to strike a powerful top left corner finish displayed his threat in front of goal as well as his overall attacking intelligence.
His finishing ability was regularly acclaimed by many coaches and teammates. The timing, accuracy and power Jairzinho would develop behind his shooting were almost perfect and very challenging for goalkeepers to reach at full stretch. He also possessed powerful and accurate shots with his left foot which acclaimed him as a complete forward.
As well as his effective attacking play Jairzinho possessed many talents on the ball and what many destined as "phenomenal technical ability". One of his signature moves included flicking the ball up from a pass in open play within the boundaries of the opposition box and cushioning the ball perfectly for an open shot. In terms of technical ability he also possessed smart creativity, which was best displayed from the cross Jairzinho put in for Pelé vs England following the famous Gordon Banks save. Some claim Jairzinho is one of the most complete forwards of all time.


== Managerial career ==

After retiring as a footballer, Jairzinho became a coach and managed a number of youth teams in his native Brazil. He also worked in Japan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. In 1997, Jairzinho began his first journey as manager in Europe being appointed at Greek Super League club Kalamata. He was sacked due to poor results, his side relegated at the end of the season. Jairzinho was named head coach of the Gabon national team. However, he was sacked by Gabon's Football Federation after a crushing defeat against Angola in a World Cup 2006 Qualifier held in Luanda. Perhaps his greatest achievement as a coach was spotting Ronaldo as a 14-year-old whilst he was coaching São Cristóvão. He kick-started the career of the future three-time FIFA World Player of the Year by recommending him to Cruzeiro, his former side, and the Brazil youth team.


== Career statistics ==
Scores and results list Brazil's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Jairzinho goal.


== Personal life ==
Jairzinho's son, Jair Ventura, is also a former footballer who managed Corinthians, Botafogo and Santos.


== Honours ==
Botafogo

Campeonato Brasileiro: 1968
Campeonato Carioca: 1961, 1962, 1967, 1968
Torneio Rio – São Paulo: 1964, 1966
Cruzeiro

Campeonato Mineiro: 1975
Copa Libertadores: 1976
Portuguesa F.C.

Primera División: 1977
Copa Venezuela: 1977
Jorge Wilstermann

Bolivian Primera División: 1980, 1981
Brazil

FIFA World Cup: 1970
Pan American Games: 1963
Independence Cup: 1972
Individual

FIFA World Cup Silver Boot: 1970
FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1970
World XI: 1971, 1972
South American Player of the Year: Bronze award 1972
World Soccer: 27th Greatest Player of the 20th Century
IFFHS Brazilian Player of the 20th Century (19th place)
Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Jairzinho – FIFA competition record (archived)
Jairzinho at Sambafoot
Jairzinho coach profile at Sambafoot (archived)
Jairzinho at InterSportStats
Jairzinho & Gordon Banks reminisce about Mexico 70, FourFourTwo magazine, 2002