Ruud Gullit (Dutch pronunciation: [ˈryt ˈxʏlɪt] ; born Rudi Dil; 1 September 1962) is a Dutch former footballer and subsequent manager. He was noted for his ability to play in multiple positions.
At club level, Gullit moved from PSV to AC Milan in 1987 for a world record transfer fee. Nicknamed "The Black Tulip", he was part of a notable Dutch trio at AC Milan which included Marco van Basten and Frank Rijkaard. Gullit won three Serie A titles and two European Cups with Milan. In 1995, he signed for Chelsea and was appointed the club's player-manager a year later. In his debut season, he led Chelsea to FA Cup success, the club's first major title for 26 years, and in doing so, became the first overseas manager to win the FA Cup.
Gullit captained the Netherlands national team that was victorious at the UEFA Euro 1988 and was also a member of the squad for the 1990 FIFA World Cup and Euro 1992.
he won the Ballon d'Or in 1987 and was named the World Soccer Player of the Year in 1987 and 1989. In 2004, he was named one of the Top 125 greatest living footballers as part of FIFA's 100th anniversary celebration.


== Early life ==
Gullit was born as Rudi Dil in Amsterdam to George Gullit, a Surinamese who arrived in the Netherlands with Herman Rijkaard (father of Frank Rijkaard), and Dutch mistress Ria Dil from the Jordaan district of Amsterdam. The Gullit family lived in one split level room on the top floor of a small apartment building. Gullit's father worked as an economics teacher at a local school, his mother as a custodian at the Rijksmuseum.
Gullit developed his football skills in the confines of the Rozendwarsstraat, and street football was instrumental in his formative years. Gullit's first team were the Meerboys, where he joined as a junior in 1970. At the age of ten, however, Gullit moved from the Jordaan to Amsterdam Old West where he played street football alongside Rijkaard. Gullit joined the DWS club after his move, and came to the attention of the Dutch youth team, where he played alongside future full international teammates, Erwin Koeman, Ronald Koeman and Wim Kieft.
It was during his time at DWS that Gullit first took to using his father's surname, rather than his registered surname (from his mother), as he thought Gullit sounded more like a football player.


== Club career ==


=== HFC Haarlem ===
On 22 September 1978, Gullit signed professionally for HFC Haarlem under coach and former West Bromwich Albion player Barry Hughes. Gullit made 91 league appearances for Haarlem, scoring 32 goals. He made his debut for the club at just 16 years and 11 months old, on 19 August 1979 (Haarlem-MVV Maastricht 2-2), becoming at the time the youngest player in the history of the Eredivisie. In his first year at Haarlem, the club finished bottom of the Eredivisie, but bounced back the following season winning the Eerste Divisie. Gullit was named as the best player in the Eerste Divisie that season.
In the 1981–82 season, Gullit was in fine form as Haarlem finished fourth and qualified for Europe for the only time in their history. In that same season, Gullit scored the goal he would later consider his finest: "Playing against Utrecht I went past four defenders and then the goalkeeper, and scored. It was an unforgettable goal for me." Hughes was so impressed with the young Gullit that he described him as the "Dutch Duncan Edwards".


=== Feyenoord ===
 
The young Gullit was considered as a signing by English sides Arsenal and Ipswich Town, but managers Terry Neill and Bobby Robson turned him down. Neill later said that he considered £30,000 too much for "this wild kid". Gullit therefore moved to Feyenoord in 1982, where he made 85 league appearances, scoring 31 goals. At Feyenoord, Gullit found himself playing in his second season, 1983–84, alongside Johan Cruyff, while the assistant manager was Wim van Hanegem, and they were to leave a lasting impression.
Gullit's first season saw Feyenoord miss out on major honours, but the following year they completed the league and cup double. Gullit was named Dutch Footballer of the Year in recognition of his contribution to Feyenoord's success. At Feyenoord, Gullit occupied an increasingly advanced role in midfield, having played predominantly as a sweeper at Haarlem. While at Feyenoord, Gullit became the focus of a race row as manager Thijs Libregts was alleged to have referred to Gullit as "blackie" and criticised him for being lazy, though Libregts defended himself by stating that it was merely a nickname. While playing for Feyenoord at St Mirren in September 1983, he was racially abused and spat on by supporters of the Scottish club. Gullit called it "the saddest night of my life".


=== PSV ===
In 1985, Gullit moved to PSV for 1.2 million Dutch guilders and wound up scoring 46 goals in 68 league appearances for the team. Gullit was again named Footballer of the Year in 1986 as he helped PSV capture the Eredivisie crown, a feat they repeated the following year.


=== AC Milan ===
Gullit signed for AC Milan in 1987, paying the then world record transfer fee of 18 million guilders as a replacement for Ray Wilkins. Milan's club president Silvio Berlusconi had an ambition to revive the fortunes of the Italian club which had stagnated after its glory days in the 1960s. Among Gullit's teammates at the club were compatriot van Basten, who came at the same time. Later, they were joined by fellow compatriot, close friend as well as Ajax teammate of van Basten, Rijkaard. The club also had a young Paolo Maldini, along with a more experienced Franco Baresi. Gullit's exploits with first PSV and then Milan helped him win the Ballon d'Or award in 1987 which he dedicated to Nelson Mandela.
When he first arrived at Milan, Gullit initially struggled to fit in as he spoke no Italian and was new to living in a foreign country. Gullit's first season at Milan, however, saw the club win the Scudetto for the first time in nine years, under coach Arrigo Sacchi. Initially used on the right of an attacking trio alongside van Basten and Pietro Virdis, after van Basten received an injury it was changed to a front two. The following season Milan built on their domestic success by adding the European Cup to their list of honours. That performance was followed by a 4–0 victory over Steaua București in the 1989 final, with Gullit scoring two crucial goals. According to Gullit: “The year that we won the Champions League, in the semi-final against Real Madrid I got injured. My meniscus was broken. I got a very quick operation so that I could play the final. The next season when I started to train again, not only my meniscus was damaged but also the cartilage, so for that reason, I couldn't play almost the whole season. It was hard because I was on the edge of maybe not playing football anymore.".
The following year, Milan retained the trophy as they defeated Benfica in the 1990 final. However, serious injuries sustained to the ligaments of his right knee limited Gullit's playing time, only managed just two domestic games in the 1989–90 season before appearing in the cup final.
In 1990–91, Milan's pursuit of a third consecutive European Cup was cut short by Marseille at the quarter-final stage. Having drawn the first leg at the San Siro, Milan trailed to a Chris Waddle goal with little time remaining when the floodlights went out. After a short delay the lighting was restored, but Milan had returned to their dressing room and refused to return to complete the game. UEFA awarded Marseille a 3–0 victory and expelled Milan from all European competitions for the following season.
While Milan continued their domestic dominance by winning the scudetto in both 1991–92 (a season in which they went undefeated) and 1992–93, Gullit's position became an increasingly peripheral one under new coach Fabio Capello. This was demonstrated by his omission from the 1993 Champions League final in which Milan lost to Marseille, as under the UEFA rules clubs were only allowed to field three foreigners, which was later abolished after the decision of the Bosman ruling. Gullit: "After my injury, I was not the Ruud Gullit anymore what I was before. I had to adjust myself to a different way of playing football, because of the injury and because I was that much out of the game. I had to adapt my game, but I could deal with it. But of course, the role at Milan was less important than before, because at that moment the rotation system was introduced. So we were only allowed to have three foreigners. So sometimes you couldn't play. So that was also hard. When you are used to playing most of the games and all of a sudden you have to rest, so that was hard.”.
Torino was interested in signing him, with the chairman claiming that an agreement with Milan was likely. Bayern Munich was also in talks with Gullit, but fell through. Instead, Gullit was loaned to Sampdoria.


=== Sampdoria ===
In 1993, Gullit moved to Sampdoria and led them to victory in the Coppa Italia in the 1993–94 season. He also scored the winner in a 3–2 victory over Milan, one of 15 goals he scored during the league campaign. He returned to Milan and scored in the season-opening 1994 Supercoppa Italiana against Sampdoria, but soon returned to the Genoese club before the midway point of the 1994–95 season, with Alessandro Melli being loaned in the opposite direction as part of the deal. During his time with Sampdoria, Gullit served under future England national team manager Sven-Göran Eriksson and the two had a strong understanding and mutual respect.


=== Chelsea ===

In July 1995, Gullit signed for Chelsea on a free transfer. Initially played as sweeper by manager Glenn Hoddle with limited success, Gullit was moved to his more familiar role in midfield, where he scored six goals. The signing of Gullit, alongside the likes of Mark Hughes and Dan Petrescu, propelled Chelsea to the semi-final of the FA Cup, although they only finished 11th in the FA Premier League.
Gullit had some difficulties adapting to the style of play at Chelsea: "I would take a difficult ball, control it, make space and play a good ball in front of the right back, except that he didn't want that pass. Eventually Glenn said to me, 'Ruud, it would be better if you do these things in midfield.'" His adjustment, however, was rapid and he ended the season by being named runner-up to Eric Cantona as Footballer of the Year.
Gullit has since often stated in interviews that it was in London he enjoyed his career the most and felt happiest: "Every time I played for Chelsea, I thought, 'Nice game, beautiful stadium, great crowd, I'm playing well.' It was the only time I really had fun." In moving to Chelsea, Gullit played an important part in the "foreign revolution" as numerous high-profile international stars, such as Italian Gianfranco Zola and Dutchman Dennis Bergkamp, joined Chelsea and Arsenal respectively, which helped to increase the Premier League's worldwide profile.


== International career ==


=== 1980s ===
In 1981, on his 19th birthday, Gullit debuted for the Netherlands national team against Switzerland as a substitute, a game the Dutch lost 2–1.
Gullit was one of the key players for the Netherlands as he helped his country win UEFA Euro 1988 under coach Rinus Michels. Having lost their opening game of the tournament to the Soviet Union, the Netherlands beat England and the Republic of Ireland to reach the semi-finals, with Gullit setting up two of van Basten's three goals in the 3–1 win in the second group match against England. After defeating West Germany 2–1 in Hamburg, the Netherlands faced the Soviet Union again in the final. Gullit opened the scoring with a header and van Basten scored a volley from a narrow angle to cap a 2–0 victory. Gullit was thus the first Dutch captain to hold aloft international silverware.


=== 1990s ===

Gullit's knee injuries also hampered his playing time at the 1990 FIFA World Cup, but his dribble and shot against the Republic of Ireland helped the Netherlands qualify for the second round. The Netherlands faced West Germany in a match marred by an altercation between Rijkaard and Rudi Völler. The Germans gained revenge for their defeat at Euro 1988 by beating the Netherlands 2–1 and going on to win the tournament.
At UEFA Euro 1992, Gullit appeared in strong form against Scotland in their opening game of the tournament as he supplied Bergkamp with the only goal of the match. However, after a goalless draw with CIS and beating Germany 3–1, the Netherlands suffered a shock exit on penalties to Denmark in the semi-finals, after a 2–2 draw; during regulation time, Gullit assisted Rijkaard for a late equaliser. The Danish side ended up winning the championship's Henri Delaunay Trophy.
In 1993, Gullit and Netherlands manager Dick Advocaat began what was to be a long-running dispute which ultimately ended Gullit's international career. Advocaat's decision to play Gullit on the right side of midfield in a game against England at Wembley, rather than his usual central position, upset him and this was exacerbated by his substitution for Peter van Vossen. Gullit refused to play for the Netherlands following this but later changed his mind and agreed to return, facing Scotland in May 1994. Shortly before the 1994 World Cup, Gullit walked out of the pre-tournament training camp and would never play international football again.


== Style of play ==
A complete and versatile player capable of aiding his team both defensively and offensively, Gullit epitomised the ethos of Total Football, possessing work rate, adeptness in ball-winning, tactical intelligence, skills and physical qualities. Normally utilised as an attacking midfielder or second striker, he was capable of playing anywhere in midfield or along the front line, on either wing or even in the centre, and could also play as a sweeper.
Gullit's foremost attribute was athleticism, being tall, powerful and an excellent jumper. Yet, unusually for a man of his stature, Gullit had outstanding natural balance, poise, technique, dribbling and free kick ability. He was also noted for his mental acuity, creativity, vision and spatial abilities, which helped him score many goals early on and enabled him to play in a deep-lying playmaker role late in his days, where he was known for creating chances for teammates. Beyond his footballing qualities, Gullit also stood out with his leadership and tenacity. Despite his talent, however, he struggled with injuries throughout his career, which later affected his fitness.
Gullit's brilliance prompted Garth Crooks to comment in his 1990 Team of the Week column, "Ruud Gullit is a great player by any standards. He has all the skills. He's not afraid to do things with the ball. And he looks as if he's enjoying every second of it. By my reckoning that's what makes him an even better player than Maradona. Both have the key quality you will find in all the best players: balance. You just can't knock them off the ball. It was the same with Pelé, Beckenbauer and Cruyff."


== Managerial career ==


=== Chelsea ===
In the summer of 1996, when Hoddle left Chelsea to become manager of the England national team, Gullit was appointed as a player-manager becoming the first Dutch manager in the Premier League. Gullit made a promising start to his managerial career when in the first season as a player-manager he guided Chelsea to an FA Cup triumph in 1997, the club's first major trophy in 26 years. In doing so he became the first manager from outside the British Isles and the first black manager to win a major British football trophy. The club also finished at a creditable sixth place in the Premiership.
The following season, with Chelsea in second place in the Premiership and proceeding to the quarter-finals in two cup competitions, he was sacked, allegedly for a disagreement with the club's board over compensation, though Gullit himself disputed this. He was replaced by Gianluca Vialli, a man he had helped to bring to the club, and who went on to guide them to UEFA Cup Winners' Cup and Football League Cup glory over the remainder of the season. Gullit's last appearance as a player came in the first leg of that season's League Cup semi-final against Arsenal, but Gullit was sacked before the second leg. After Gullit's controversial sacking by Chelsea, chairman Ken Bates said of Gullit, "I didn't like his arrogance – in fact I never liked him."


=== Newcastle United ===
In August 1998, Gullit was named manager of Newcastle United two games into the new league season and reached the 1999 FA Cup Final in his first year. Fans remained supportive despite a poor run of results, although well-publicised disagreements with the team's top scorer Alan Shearer and captain Rob Lee did not put him in a favourable light. Gullit refused to assign Lee a squad number, giving Lee's number 7 to new signing Kieron Dyer. In a match between Newcastle and local rivals Sunderland following the latter's return to the Premiership, Gullit left the usual starting strikers Shearer and Duncan Ferguson on the bench. Newcastle lost 2–1, and Gullit resigned three days later, five games into the 1999–2000 season.


=== Feyenoord ===
Before the start of the 2004–05 season, Gullit took charge of Feyenoord, quitting at the end of that season without winning any trophies, being replaced by Erwin Koeman. Feyenoord had finished a disappointing fourth in the Eredivisie, behind Ajax, PSV and AZ.


=== Los Angeles Galaxy ===

On 8 November 2007, Gullit became head coach for the LA Galaxy, signing a three-year contract. His US$2 million per year salary was the highest ever given to a Major League Soccer (MLS) head coach. Gullit arrived as replacement for Frank Yallop who was let go after Galaxy failed to make the 2007 MLS playoffs despite having record signing David Beckham on the roster.
Gullit's time with Galaxy was troublesome. Not well-versed in the intricacies and specifics of the MLS such as salary cap and draft rules, the Dutchman did not adapt well to the North American league. After losing 0–4 in the season opener, Gullit clashed with midfielder Peter Vagenas, who criticized him for neglecting set-play practice during training.
As the season progressed, Gullit clashed with several players, including Landon Donovan and Abel Xavier; the latter criticized Gullit's managerial style and said he did not have respect for most of the players. It was later reported that Gullit's appointment had been made in controversial fashion as Galaxy general manager, Alexi Lalas, had been bypassed in the process, with the decision being led by David Beckham's advisers: his management company 19 Entertainment and his personal manager Terry Byrne.
On 11 August 2008, Gullit resigned as coach of the Galaxy, citing personal reasons. This came following a seven-game winless streak. General manager Lalas was fired at the same time.


=== Terek Grozny ===
On 18 January 2011, Russian Premier League side Terek Grozny announced that Gullit has agreed to sign a year-and-a-half contract and become the head coach for the Chechen side. Upon signing, Gullit told Sovetsky Sport, "I'd like to believe that I can bring joy into the lives of the Chechen people through football... Of course, I won't deny that I'm getting lots of money from Terek." Gullit left the club on 14 June 2011.


== Media career ==

In 1988,  together with the reggae band Revelation Time, Gullit gained a No. 3 chart hit with the anti-apartheid song "South Africa" in the Dutch Top 40. Previously, he had a modest hit in 1984 with the song "Not the Dancing Kind". Gullit also joined his band in front of 3,000 people at concerts in Italy, in the year he made a move to AC Milan.
After his spell at Newcastle, Gullit spent several years working as a football commentator, having previously coined the term "sexy football" during his spell as a BBC pundit for Euro 1996 while still playing professionally for Chelsea. Gullit used the term to describe teams, such as Portugal at that tournament, who played attractive football with an emphasis on the defense-penetrating pass-and-move game.
By 2006, Gullit had a talk show on Dutch TV, where he has interviewed, amongst others, Nelson Mandela. When Gullit was named winner of the Ballon d'Or in 1987, he dedicated the award to the then imprisoned Nelson Mandela. Gullit has since said in interviews that he met Mandela after he was released, and that Mandela had said to him, "Ruud, I have lots of friends now. When I was on the inside, you were one of the few."
In 2007, Gullit recalled, "Four months ago I visited Robben Island and met three guys who were cell-mates of Nelson Mandela. They remembered me dedicating my award in 1987 to Mandela and they said they couldn't believe what I had done, and were sure the football authorities would withdraw the award. That's what apartheid did to them, it made them believe injustice was a normal part of life."
Gullit also appeared as a pundit for ITV during the 2006 World Cup and works as an analyst for Champions League games on Sky Sports and Al Jazeera Sports. During the 2010 FIFA World Cup, Gullit worked as a studio analyst alongside former players Jürgen Klinsmann and Steve McManaman for ESPN. He subsequently worked as an analyst for Al Jazeera Sports during Euro 2012 alongside Glenn Hoddle and Terry Venables, among others.
In 2013, Gullit and many other former footballers were brought into EA Sports's FIFA 14 as "Legends" cards in FIFA Ultimate Team; his card is one of the highest rated in the game.
In 2014, Gullit joined BBC's Match of the Day as a studio pundit and first appeared during the 2014–15 season.
Gullit embarked on the Heineken Champions League Trophy Tour in 2016 where he visited Vietnam with Carles Puyol. For the 2022 World Cup, Gullit worked for BeIN Sports and has continued to do so for the UEFA Champions League coverage for the 2022–23 season.


== Personal life ==
Gullit is a Feyenoord supporter. Gullit was married to Yvonne de Vries from 1984 to 1991, with whom he had two daughters. From 1994 to 2000 he was married to Italian Christina Pensa, with whom he also had two children. From 2000 to 2012 he was married to Estelle Cruyff, a niece of Johan Cruyff. He also had two children with her. Their son Maxim Gullit played professional football and had a contract with SC Cambuur.


== Career statistics ==


=== Club ===


=== International ===

Scores and results list the Netherlands' goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Gullit goal.


== Managerial statistics ==
All competitive league games (league and domestic cup) and international matches (including friendlies) are included.

As of 2 May 2015


== Honours ==


=== Player ===
HFC Haarlem

Eerste Divisie: 1980–81
Feyenoord

Eredivisie: 1983–84
KNVB Cup: 1983–84
PSV

Eredivisie: 1985–86, 1986–87
AC Milan

Serie A: 1987–88, 1991–92, 1992–93
Supercoppa Italiana: 1992, 1994
European Cup: 1988–89, 1989–90
UEFA Super Cup: 1990,  1989
Intercontinental Cup: 1990
Sampdoria

Coppa Italia: 1993–94
Chelsea

FA Cup: 1996–97
Netherlands

UEFA European Championship: 1988


=== Manager ===
Chelsea

FA Cup: 1996–97
Individual

Dutch Footballer of the Year: 1984, 1986
Dutch Golden Shoe: 1986
Dutch Sportsman of the Year: 1987
Ballon d'Or: 1987; Runner-up 1988
World Soccer Magazine World Footballer of the Year: 1987, 1989
Onze de Onze: 1987, 1988, 1989
Onze d'Argent: 1988, 1989
UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament: 1988, 1992
FIFA XI: 1991
Premier League PFA Team of the Year: 1995–96
Chelsea Player of the Year: 1996
FIFA 100
UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll: #13
Golden Foot: 2011, as football legend
AC Milan Hall of Fame
The Best of The Best – Player of the Century: Top 50
World Soccer: The 100 Greatest Footballers of All Time
FAI International Football Awards – International Personality: 2008
IFFHS Legends
Italian Football Hall of Fame: 2017


== Bibliography ==
Ruud Gullit: My Autobiography (1998) with Harry Harris
Kijken naar voetbal (2016); English translations: How to Watch Football (2016), How to Watch Soccer (2017)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Harris, Harry (1996). Ruud Gullit: Portrait of a Genius.
Glanville, Brian (1999). Footballers Don't Cry.


== External links ==

Profile at the AC Milan website
Profile at the Royal Dutch Football Association website (in Dutch)
Ruud Gullit – FIFA competition record (archived) 
Ruud Gullit – UEFA competition record (archive) 
Ruud Gullit at Wereld van Oranje (archived) (in Dutch)
European Champions Cup/UEFA Champions League Winning Squads